## A Plain Description of the Essence and Attributes of God, Out of the Holy
Scripture, so Far as Every Christian Must Competently Know, and Necessarily
Believe, That Will be Saves.

Although no creature can define what God is, because he is
incomprehensible (Psal. cxliii. 3) and dwelling in inaccessible light
(1 Tim. vi. 16); yet it has pleased his majesty to reveal himself to us
in his word, so far as our weak capacity can best conceive him. Thus:

God is that one spiritual and infinitely perfect essence, whose being
is of himself eternally (Deut. i. 4; iv. 35; xxxii. 39; vi. 4; Isa.
xlv. 5-8; 1 Cor. viii. 4; Eph. iv. 5, 6; 1 Tim. ii. 5; John iv. 24; 2
Cor. iii. 17; 1 Kings viii. 17; Psal. cxlvii. 5; Deut. xxxii. 4; Exod.
iii. 14; 1 Cor. viii. 6; Acts xvii. 25; Rom. xi. 36.)

In the Divine Essence we are to consider two things: First, The diverse
manner of being therein; secondly, The attributes thereof.

The diverse manner of being therein, are called Persons (Heb. i. 3.)

A person is a distinct subsistence of the whole Godhead (John i. 1; v.
31, 37; xiv. 16; Col. ii. 9; John xiv. 9.)

There are Three Divine Persons, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost
(Gen. i. 26; iii. 22; xi. 7; Exod. xx. 2; Hos. i. 4, 7; Isa. lxiii. 9,
10; Zech. iii. 2; Hag. ii. 5, 6; 1 John v. 7; Matt. iii. 16, 17;
xxviii. 19; John xiv. 26; 2 Cor. xiii. 13.) These three persons are not
three several substances, but three distinct subsistences; or three
diverse manner of beings, of one and the same substance and divine
essence. So that a person in the Godhead is an individual Understanding
and incommunicable subsistence, living of itself, and not sustained by
another.

In the unity of the Godhead there is a plurality which is not
accidental (Gen. i. 26; iii. 22; xi. 7; Isa. vi. 8), for God is a most
pure act, and admits no accidents; nor essential, for God is one
essence only--but personal.

The persons in this one essence are but three. In this mystery there is
alius et alius, another and another; but not aliud et aliud, another
thing and another thing.

The Divine Essence in itself is neither divided nor distinguished, but
the three Persons in the Divine Essence are distinguished amongst
themselves three manner of ways:

1. By their Names. 2. By their Order. 3. By their Actions.

### By their Names, thus:

The first Person is named the Father; first, in respect of his natural
son, Christ (Matt. xi. 27; iii. 17;) secondly, in respect of the elect,
his adopted sons (Isa. lxiii. 16; Eph. iii. 14, 15;) that is, those
who, being not his sons by nature, are made his sons by grace.

The second Person is named the Son, because he is begotten of his
Father's substance, or nature (Prov. xxx. 4; Psal. ii. 7; Heb. i. 3;
Phil. ii. 6;) and he is called the Word--First, because the conception
of a word in man's mind is the nearest thing that, in some sort, can
shadow to us the manner how he is eternally begotten of his Father's
substance; and in this respect he is also called the Wisdom of his
Father (Prov. viii. 12.) Secondly, because that by him the Father has
from the beginning declared his will for our salvation (John i. 18);
hence he is called logos quasi legon, the person speaking with or by
the Father. Thirdly, because he is the chief argument of all the word
of God (Acts x. 43; Heb. i. 1; Luke xxiv. 27; John v. 45; Acts iii. 22,
23, 24), or that Word whereof God spake when he promised the blessed
seed to the fathers under the Old Testament.

The third Person is named the Holy Ghost (Isa. lxiii. 10; 2 Cor. xiii.
14)--First, because he is spiritual, without a body (1 John iv. 13; 2
Cor. iii. 17.) Secondly, because he is spired, and as it were breathed
from both the Father and the Son (John xx. 21, 22; Gal. iv. 6), that
is, proceedeth from them both; and he is called Holy, both because he
is holy in his own nature (1 Pet. i. 15, 16), and also the immediate
sanctifier of all God's elect people (2 Cor. iii. 18; 1 Thess. v. 23; 1
Pet. i. 2.)

### By their Order, thus:

The Persons of the Godhead are either the Father, or those which are of
the Father. [9] The Father is the first Person (Mat. xxviii. 19; 1 John
v. 7) in the glorious Trinity, [10] having neither his being nor
beginning of any other but of himself; begetting his Son, and together
with his Son sending forth the Holy Ghost from everlasting. The persons
which are of the Father are those who, in respect of their personal
existence, have the whole divine essence eternally communicated unto
them from the Father. And those are either from the Father alone, as
the Son; or from the Father and the Son, as the Holy Ghost.

The Son is the second Person of the glorious Trinity, and the only
begotten Son of his Father, not by grace, but by nature; having his
being of the Father alone, and the whole being of his Father by an
eternal and incomprehensible generation; and with the Father sendeth
forth the Holy Ghost. [11] In respect of his absolute essence, he is of
himself; but in respect of his person he is, by an eternal generation,
of his Father. For the essence doth not beget an essence, but the
person of the Father begetteth the person of the Son, and so he is God
of God, and hath from his Father the beginning of his person and order,
but not of essence and time.

The Holy Ghost is the third Person of the blessed Trinity, proceeding
and sent forth equally from both the Father and the Son (John xv. 26;
xvi. 15) [12] by an eternal and incomprehensible spiration. For as the
Son receiveth the whole divine essence by generation, so the Holy Ghost
receiveth it wholly by spiration. [14]

This order betwixt the three persons appears in that the Father
begetting must in order be before the Son begotten; and the Father and
Son, before the Holy Ghost proceeding from both.

This order serves to set forth to us two things--First, the manner how
the Trinity worketh in their external actions; as, that the Father
worketh of himself, by the Son and the Holy Ghost; the Son from the
Father by the Holy Ghost; the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son.
Secondly, to distinguish the first and immediate beginning from which
those external and common actions flow. Hence it is, that forasmuch as
the Father is the fountain and original of the Trinity, the beginning
of all external working, the name of God in relation, and the title of
Creator in the creed, are given in a special manner to the Father; our
redemption to the Son, and our sanctification to the person of the Holy
Ghost, as the immediate agents of those actions. And this also is the
cause why the Son, as he is mediator, referreth all things to the
Father, not to the Holy Ghost (Matt. xi. 25, 26, 27; John v. 19-23; xi.
41, 42; xii. 49), and that the Scripture so often saith that we are
reconciled to the Father (2 Cor. v. 18, &c.)

This divine order or economy excepted, there is neither first nor last,
neither superiority nor inferiority, among the three persons; but for
nature they are co-essential, for dignity co-equal, for time
co-eternal.

The whole divine essence is in every one of the three persons; but it
was incarnated only in the second person of the Word, and not in the
person of the Father, or of the Holy Ghost, for three reasons:--

First, That God the Father might the rather set forth the greatness of
his love to mankind, in giving his first and only-begotten Son to be
incarnated, and to suffer death for man's salvation.

Secondly, That he who was in his divinity the Son of God, should be in
his humanity the Son of man: lest the name of Son should pass to
another, who by his eternal nativity was not the Son.

Thirdly, Because it was meetest that that person, who is the
substantial image of his eternal Father, should restore in us the
spiritual image of God, which we had lost. In the incarnation, the
Godhead was not turned into the manhood, nor the manhood into the
Godhead; but the Godhead, as it is the second person or Word, assumed
unto it the manhood, that is, the whole nature of man, body and soul;
and all the natural properties and infirmities thereof, sin excepted
[15] (Heb. iii. 17, 18; .)

The second person took not upon him the person of man, but the nature
of man. [16] So that the human nature has no personal subsistence of
its own (for then there should be two persons in Christ), but it
subsisteth in the Word, the second person: for as the soul and body
make but one person of man, so the Godhead and manhood make but one
person of Christ.

The two natures of the Godhead and manhood are so really united by a
personal union, that as they can never be separated asunder, so are
they never confounded; but remain still distinguished by their several
and essential properties which they had before they were united. As for
example, the infiniteness of the divine is not communicated to the
human nature, nor the finiteness of the human to the divine nature.

Yet by reason of this personal union, there is such a communion of the
properties of both natures, that that which is proper to the one is
sometimes attributed to the other nature. As, that God purchased the
church with his own blood (Acts xx. 28); and that he will judge the
world by that man whom he hath appointed (Acts xvii. 31.) Hence also it
is, that though the humanity of Christ be a created, and therefore a
finite and limited nature, and cannot be everywhere present by actual
position, or local extension, according to his natural being; yet
because he hath communicated unto it the personal subsistence of the
Son of God, which is infinite, and without limitation,, and is so
united with God, that it is nowhere severed from God, the body of
Christ, in respect of his personal being, may rightly be said to be
everywhere.

### The Actions by which the Three Persons are distinguished.

The actions are of two sorts: either external, respecting the
creatures; and those are after a sort common to every one of the three
persons: or internal, respecting the persons only amongst themselves,
and are altogether incommunicable.

The external and communicable actions of the three persons are these:

The creation of the world, peculiarly belonging to God the Father; the
redemption of the church, to God the Son; and the sanctification of the
elect, to God the Holy Ghost. But because the Father created (Rom. xi.
36) and still governeth the world by the Son in the Holy Ghost,
therefore these external actions are indifferently, in Scripture, often
ascribed to each of the three persons, and therefore called
communicable and divided actions. [17]

The internal and incommunicable actions or properties of the three
persons are these:

1. To beget; and that belongeth only to the Father, who is neither
made, created, nor begotten of any.

2. To be begotten; and that belongeth only to the Son, who is of the
Father alone, not made, nor created, but begotten.

3. To proceed from both; and that belongeth only to the Holy Ghost, who
is of the Father and the Son; neither made, nor created, nor begotten,
but proceeding.

So that when we say, that the divine essence is in the Father
unbegotten, in the Son begotten, and in the Holy Ghost proceeding, we
make not three essences, but only shew the diverse manners of
subsisting, by which the same most simple, eternal, and unbegotten
essence subsisteth in each person: namely, that it is not in the Father
by generation; that it is in the Son communicated from the Father by
generation; and in the Holy Ghost communicated from both the Father and
the Son by proceeding.

These are incommunicable actions, and make not an essential,
accidental, or rational, but a real distinction betwixt the three
persons: so that he who is the Father in the Trinity, is not the Son;
he who is the Son in the Trinity, is not the Father; he who is the Holy
Ghost in the Trinity, is neither the Son nor the Father, but the Spirit
proceeding from both; though there is but one and the same essence
common to all three. As therefore we believe that the Father is God,
the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God, so we likewise believe that
God is the Father, God is the Son, and God is the Holy Ghost. But by
reason of this real distinction, the person of the one is not, nor ever
can be, the person of the other. The three persons, therefore, of the
Godhead, do not differ from the essence but formally; but they differ
really one from another, and so are distinguished by their hypostatical
proprieties. As the Father is God, begetting God the Son; the Son is
God, begotten of God the Father; and the Holy Ghost is God, proceeding
from both God the Father and God the Son.

Hence it is that the Scriptures use the name of God two manner of ways:
either essentially, and then it signifieth the three persons
conjointly; or personally, and then by a synecdoche it signifieth but
one of the three persons in the Godhead; as the Father (1 Tim. ii. 5),
or the Son (Acts xx. 28; 1 Tim. iii. 16), or the Holy Ghost (Acts v. 4;
2 Cor. vi. 16.)

And because the divine essence (common to all the three persons) is but
one, we call the same Unity. But because there be three distinct
persons in this one indivisible essence, we call the same Trinity. So
that this unity in trinity, and trinity in unity, is a holy mystery,
rather to be religiously adored by faith, than curiously searched by
reason, further than God has revealed in his word.

Thus far of the diverse Manner of being in the Divine Essence; now of
the Attributes thereof.

Attributes are certain descriptions of the Divine Essence, delivered in
the Scriptures according to the weakness of our capacity, to help us
the better to understand the nature of God's essence, and to discern it
from all other essences.

The attributes of God are of two sorts, either nominal or real.

The nominal attributes are of three sorts: 1. Those which signify God's
essence. 2. The persons in the essence. 3. Those which signify his
essential works.

Of the first sort is the name Jehovah (Exod. xv. 3), or rather Jehueh,
[18] which signifieth the eternal being of himself, in whom, being
without all beginning and end, all other beings both begin and end
(Isa. xlii. 8; Psalm lxxxiii. 18.)

God tells Moses (Exod. vi. 3) that he was not known to Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, by his name Jehovah. Not but that they knew this to be the
name of God, for they used it in all their prayers, but because they
lived not to see God effecting in deed (Exod. vi. 3) that which he
promised them in graciously delivering their seed out of Egypt, and in
giving them the real possession of Canaan's land, and so to be not only
God Almighty, by whom all things were made, but also performing in deed
to the children that which he promised in his word to the fathers,
which this name Jehovah especially signifieth. And for this cause Moses
calls God first Jehovah, when the universal creation had its absolute
being (Gen. ii. 4.) And this admirable name is graven on the
decalogue's forehead, which was pronounced upon the Israelites'
deliverance, to be the rule of righteousness, after which they should
serve their Deliverer in the promised land.

This name is so full of divine mysteries, that the Jews hold it a sin
to pronounce it; but if it be no sin to write it, why should it be
unlawful to pronounce it?

This holy name of God teacheth us--

First, what God is in himself; namely, an eternal being of himself.

Secondly, how he is unto others, because that from him all other
creatures have received their being.

Thirdly, that we may confidently believe his promises, for he is named
Jehovah, not only in respect of being, and causing all things to be,
but especially in respect of his gracious promises, which without fail
he will fulfil in his appointed time, and so cause that to be which was
not before. And so this name is a golden pledge unto us, that because
he hath promised, he will surely, upon our repentance, forgive us all
our sins (Isa. lv. 7; John xi. 5; xii. 26; xiv. 2, 3; Job vi. 40;) at
the time of death receive our souls, and in the resurrection raise up
our bodies in glory to life everlasting.

The second name denoting God's essence is Ehejeh; but once read (Exod.
iii. 14) of the same root that Jehovah is, and signifieth I am, or I
will be; for when Moses asked God by what name he should call him, God
then named himself Ehejeh, Asher Ehejeh, I am that I am, or I will be
that I will be, signifying, that he is an eternal, unchangeable being:
for seeing every creature is temporary and mutable, no creature can
say, ero qui ero, I will be that I will be. This name in the New
Testament is given to our Lord Christ, when he is called Alpha and
Omega, the beginning and the ending, which is, which was, and which is
to come, the Almighty (Rev. i. 8.) For all time, past and to come, is
always present before God. And to this name Christ himself alludeth,
John viii. 58, "Before Abraham was, I am."

This name should teach us likewise to have always present in our minds
our first creation, present corruption, and future glorification; and
not content ourselves with, I was good, or, I will be good, but to be
good presently, that whenever God sends for us, he may find us prepared
for him.

The third name is Jah, which, as it comes of the same root, so is it
the contract of Jehovah, and signifieth Lord, because he is the
beginning and being of beings. [19] It is a name for the most part
ascribed unto God (Psal. lxviii. 19; ci. 18; cvi. 1, 48; cxi. 1, &c;
cxii. 1, &c; cxiii. 1, 9; cxv. 17, 18; cxvi. 19; cxviii. 5, 14; cxxv.
34), when some notable deliverance or benefit comes to pass according
to his former promise; and therefore all creatures in heaven and earth
are commanded to celebrate and praise God in this name Jah.

The fourth is Kurios, Lord, used often in the New Testament: for kuro,
or kureo, signifieth I am. Hence kuros signifieth the first essence of
a thing, or authority. When it is absolutely given to God, it answereth
to the Hebrew name Jehovah, and is so translated by the seventy
interpreters: for God is so a Lord, that he is of himself Lord of all.
This name should always put us in remembrance to obey his commandments,
and to fear his judgments, and submit ourselves to his blessed will and
pleasure, saying with Eli, "It is the Lord, let him do what seemeth him
good," 1 Sam. iii. 18.

The fifth is Theos, God, six hundred times used in the New Testament,
and the profane writers commonly. It is derived apo tou thein, because
he runs through and compasseth all things; or apo tou aithein, which
signifieth to burn and kindle--for God is light, and the author both of
heat, light, and life in all creatures, either immediately of himself,
or mediately by secondary causes. This name is used either improperly,
or properly. Improperly, when it is given either figuratively to
magistrates, or falsely to idols. But when it is properly and
absolutely taken, it signifieth the eternal essence of God, being above
all things, and through all things; giving life and light to all
creatures, and preserving and governing them in their wonderful frame
and order. God seeth all in all places; let us therefore everywhere
take heed what we do in his sight.

Thus far of the names which signify God's essence. The name which
signifieth the persons in the essence, is chiefly one, Elohim.

Elohim signifieth the mighty Judges; it is a name of the plural number,
to express the trinity of persons in unity of essence. And to this
purpose the Holy Ghost beginneth the holy Bible with this plural name
of God, joined with a verb of the singular number, as Elohim Bara, Dii
creavit, the mighty Gods, or all the three persons in the Godhead
created. The Jews also note in the verb vr', consisting of three
letters, the mystery of the Trinity, by v beth, ben, the Son; by r
resch, rouach, the Spirit; by ' aleph, ab, the Father. But this holy
mystery is more clearly taught by Moses, Gen. iii. 23. And Jehovah
Elohim said, "Behold the man is become as one of us." And Gen. xix. 24,
"Jehovah rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah, brimstone and fire from
Jehovah out of heaven;" that is, God the Son, from God the Father, who
hath committed all judgment unto the Son (John v. 22; see Psal. xxxiii.
6; Isa. vi. 8, 9, 10.) The singular number of Elohim is Eloah, derived
of Alah, he swore; because that in all weighty causes, when necessity
requireth an oath to decide the truth, we are only to swear by the name
of God, who is the great and righteous Judge of heaven and earth.

This name Eloah is but seldom used, as Habak. iii. 3; Job iv. 9; xii.
4; xv. 2, 8, 36; Psal. xviii. 32; cxiv. 7. Once it has a noun plural
joined to it, Job xxxv. 10, "None saith, where is Eloah Gosai, the
Almighty my Maker?" to note the mystery of the eternal Trinity. Many
times also Elohim, the plural number, is joined with a verb singular,
to express more emphatically, this mystery (Gen. xxxv. 7; 2 Sam. vii.
23; Josh. xxiv. 19; Jer. x. 10.) Elohim is also sometimes tropically
given to magistrates, because they are God's vicegerents; as to Moses
(Exod. vii. 1), Jehovah said unto Moses, I have made thee Elohim to
Pharaoh; that is, I have appointed thee an ambassador to represent the
person of the true three-one God, and to deliver his message and will
unto Pharaoh; as oft, therefore, as we read, or hear this name Elohim,
it should put us is mind to consider, that in one divine essence there
are three distinct Persons, and that God is Jehovah Elohim.

Now follow the Names which signify God's essential Works, which are
these five especially:--

1. El, which is as much as the strong God, [20] and teacheth us, that
God is not only most strong, and fortitude itself in his own essence,
but also that it is he that giveth all strength and power to all other
creatures. Therefore Christ is called (Isa. ix. 6) El Gibbor, the
strong most mighty God. Let not God's children fear the power of
enemies, for El, our God, is stronger than they.

2. Shaddai, [21] that is, Omnipotent. By this name God usually styled
himself to the patriarchs, I am El Shaddai, the strong God Almighty;
because he is perfectly able to defend his servants from all evil, to
bless them with all spiritual and temporal blessings, and to perform
all his promises which he hath made to them for this life, and that
which is to come. This name belongeth only to the Godhead, and to no
creature, no not to the humanity of Christ. This may teach us with the
patriarchs, to put our whole confidence in God, and not to doubt of the
true performance of his promises.

3. Adonai, [22] my Lord. This name, as theMassorets note, is found one
hundred and thirty-four times in the Old Testament; and logically it is
given to creatures, but properly it belongeth to God alone. It is used
(Mal. i. 6) in the plural number to note the mystery of the holy
Trinity. If I be Adonim, Lords, where is my fear? Adoni, the singular;
Adonim, the plural number. This name is given to Christ, Dan. ix. 16,
"Cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that is desolate, for Adoni
(the Lord Christ) his sake."

The hearing of this holy name may teach every man to obey God's
commandments, to fear him alone, to suffer none besides him to reign in
his conscience, to lay hold (by a particular hand of faith) upon his
word and promise, and to challenge God in Christ to be his God, that he
may say with Thomas, "Thou art my Lord and my God."

4. Helion, that is, Most High (Psal. ix. 2; xci. 9; xcii. 9; Dan. iv.
17, 24, 25, 34; Acts vii. 48.) This name Gabriel gives to God, telling
the Virgin Mary that the child which should be born of her, should be
the Son of the Most High [23] (Luke i. 32.) This teacheth, that God in
his essence and glory exceedeth infinitely all creatures in heaven and
earth; secondly, that no man should be proud of any earthly honour or
greatness; thirdly, if we desire true dignity, to labour to have
communion with God in grace and glory.

5. Abba, a Syriac name, signifying Father (Rom. viii. 15.) This is
sometimes used essentially, as in the Lord's prayer; secondly,
personally (as Matt. xi. 25.) For God is the Father of Christ by
nature, and of Christians by adoption and grace. Christ is called the
everlasting Father (Isa. ix. 6), because he regenerates us under the
New Testament. God is also called the Father of lights (Jam. i. 17),
because God dwelleth in inaccessible light (1 Tim. vi. 16), and is the
author not only of the sun's light, but also of all the light, both of
natural reason, and of supernatural grace, which lighteneth every man
that cometh into the world. This name teacheth us, that all the gifts
which we receive from God proceed from his mere fatherly love;
secondly, that we should love him again as dear children; thirdly, that
we may, in all our needs and troubles, be bold to call upon him as a
father for his help and succour. Thus should we not hear of the sacred
names of God, but we should thereby be put in mind of his goodness to
us, and of our duties to him. And then should we find how comfortable a
thing it is to do everything in the name of God,--a phrase usual in
every man's tongue, but the true comfort of it, through ignorance,
known to few men's hearts.

It is a great wisdom, and an unspeakable matter for the strengthening
of a Christian's faith, to know how, in the mediation of Christ, to
invocate God by such a name, as whereby he hath manifested himself to
be most willing, and best able, to help and succour him in his present
need or adversity. The ardent desire of knowing God, is the surest
testimony of our love to God, and of God's favour to us. "Because he
hath set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him; I will set him
on high, because he hath known my name: He shall call upon me, and I
will answer him," &c. Psal. xci. 14, 15. And it is a great
strengthening of faith with understanding to begin every action in the
name of God.

Thus far of the nominal attributes.

The real attributes are of two sorts; either absolute or relative.

The absolute attributes are such, which cannot in any sort agree to any
creature, but to God alone.

These are two, Simpleness and Infiniteness.

Si'mpleness is that whereby God is void of all composition, division,
multiplication, accidents, or parts compounding, either sensible or
intelligible; so that what ever he is, he is the same essentially.

It hinders not God's simpleness that he is three, because God is three,
not by composition of parts, but by co-existence of persons.

Infiniteness is that whereby all things in God are void of all measure,
limitation, and bounds above and beneath, before and after.

From these two do necessarily flow three other absolute attributes.

1. Unmeasureableness or ubiquity, whereby he is of infinite extension,
filling heaven and earth (Acts vii. 48; Psal clxv; Job xi. 7, &c.; 2
Chron. ii. 5, 6; , &c.; Jer. xxiii. 23, 24), containing all places, and
not contained of any space, place, or bounds, and being nowhere absent,
is everywhere present.

There are four degrees of God's presence: The first is universal, by
which God is repletively everywhere, inclusively nowhere; secondly,
special, by which God is said to be in heaven, because that there his
power, wisdom, and goodness is in a more excellent manner seen and
enjoyed (Psal. xix. 1; Hos. ii. 21); as also because that usually he
doth from thence pour forth his blessings and Judgments; thirdly, more
special, by which God dwelleth in his saints (1 Cor. iii. 16; ; 2 Cor.
vi. 16); fourthly, most special, and altogether singular, by which the
whole fulness of the Godhead dwelleth in Christ bodily (Col. ii. 8.)

2. Unchangeableness, whereby God is void of all change, both in respect
of his essence and will [24] (Rom. i. 23; Isa. xl. 28; Psal. cii. 27,
&c.; Rev. i. 8; 1 Sam. xv. 29; Numb. xxiii. 19; Mal. iii. 6; Rom. xi.
29; James i. 18.)

3. Eternity, whereby God is without beginning of days, or end of time,
and without all bounds of precession or succession. [25] (Isa. xliv. 6;
James v. 19; Dan. vi. 26; Heb. xii; Rev. iv. 8.)

Thus far of the absolute attributes; now of the relative, or such which
have reference to the creatures.

Those are five:--1. Life; 2. Understanding; 3. Will; 4. Power; 5.
Majesty;

1. The life of God is that by which, as by a most pure and perpetual
act, he not only liveth of himself, but is also that ever and
overflowing fountain of life, from which all creatures derive their
lives (Acts xvii. 25, 28; xiv. 15; Psal. xlii. 2; xxxvi. 19; John v.
26; Heb. iii. 12); so as that in him they live, move, breathe, and have
their being. And because only his life differs not from his essence;
[26] therefore God is said only to have immortality (1 Tim. vi. 16.)

2. The understanding, or knowledge of God, is that whereby, by one pure
act, he most perfectly knoweth in himself all things that ever were,
are, or shall be; yea, the thoughts and imaginations of men's hearts (1
Kings viii. 39; Psal. lxiv. 21; cxxxix. 1, &c.; Jer. xvii. 10; xx. 12;
Luke xvi. 15; Acts i. 24; Heb. iv. 12; Rom. xi. 33; xvi. 17; 1 Tim. ii.
19; Matt. vii. 13.)

This knowledge of God is either general, by which God knoweth simply
all things eternally, the good by himself, the evil by the good
opposite to it, imposing to things contingent the lot of contingency,
and to things necessary the law of necessity. And thus knowing all
things in and of himself, he is the cause of all the knowledge that is
in all, both men and angels. Or, secondly, special, called the
knowledge of approbation, by which he particularly knoweth, and
graciously acknowledged, only his elect or his own.

Understanding also contains the wisdom of God, by which he most wisely
created all things of nothing, in number, measure; and weight, and
still ruleth and disposeth them to serve his own most holy purpose and
glory. [27]

3. The will of God is that whereby of necessity he willeth himself as
the sovereign good (1 Tim. ii. 5; Rom. ix. 19; Eph. i. 5); and (by
willing himself) willeth most freely all other good things which are
out of himself.

The will of God, though in itself it be but one, as is his essence, yet
in respect of the diversity of objects and effects, it is called in the
Scriptures by diverse names; as,

(1.) Love, whereby is meant God's eternal good-will (1 John iii. 1),
whereby he ordaineth his elect to be freely saved through Christ, and
bestoweth on them all necessary graces for this life (Psal. xlv. 7) and
that to come, taking pleasure in their persons and services (Gen. iv.
4.)

(2.) Justice is God's constant will (Rom. ii. 5; 2 Thess. i. 6, &c.; 2
Tim. iv. 8; Deut. vii. 9, 10), whereby he recompenseth men and angels,
according to their works; punishing the impenitent according to their
deserts, called the justice of his wrath; and rewarding the faithful
according to his promises, called the justice of his grace (Rom. ix.
15, 16; Ezek. xvi. 6.)

(3.) Mercy, which is God's mere good will (Psal. ciii. 8, &c.; Tit.
iii. 4) and ready affection to forgive a penitent sinner,
notwithstanding all his sins and ill deserts.

(4.) Goodness, whereby God willingly communicates his good with his
creatures [28] (Psal. cxlv. 7, 9, 16; Matt. xvi. 17); and because he
communicates it freely, it is termed grace.

(5.) Truth, whereby God willeth constantly those things which he
willeth (Josh. xiii. 14; Psal. cxlix. 6; Numb. xxiii. 19); [29]
effecting and performing all things which he hath spoken in his
appointed time.

(6.) Patience, whereby God willingly forbeareth to punish the wicked,
so long as it may stand with his justice, and until their sins be
ripened (2 Pet. iii. 9; Rom. ii. 4; Gen. v. 16.)

  Ad poenam tardus Deus est, ad præmia velox;

  Sed pensare solet vi graviore moram.

(7.) Holiness, whereby God's nature is separated from all profaneness,
and abhorreth all filthiness (1 Pet. i. 5; 1 Thess. iv. 3; Heb. xii.
14; Mark xv. 9); and so being wholly pure in himself, delighteth in the
inward and outward purity of his servants, which he infuseth into them.

(8.) Anger, whereby is meant God's most certain and just will in
chastening the elect [30] (Psal. cvi. 23, 29, 40, 41; Numb. xxv. 11);
and in revenging and punishing the reprobate, for the injuries they
offer to him and his chosen; and when God will punish with rigour and
severity, then it is termed wrath, temporal to the elect, eternal to
the reprobates (1 Cor. xix. 2; 1 Thess. i. 10.)

4. The Power of God is that whereby he can simply and freely do
whatsoever he will [31] (Gen. xvii. 1; Psal. cxv. 3; Matt. viii. 2; xi.
26; Eph. i. 11), that is agreeable to his nature; and whereby, as he
hath made, so he still ruleth heaven and earth, and all things therein.
This almighty power of God is either absolute, by which he can will,
and do more than he willeth or doth (Matt. iii. 9; xx. 53; Rom. ix.
18); or actual, by which God doth indeed whatsoever he will, and
hindereth whatsoever he will not have done (Psal. cxv. 3.)

5. Majesty is that by which God, of his own absolute and free
authority, reigneth and ruleth as Lord and King over all creatures
visible, and invisible (1 Chron. xxix. 11, 12; 2 Sam. vii. 22; Rev. v.
12, 13); having both the right and propriety in all things [32] (1
Chron. xxix. 14); as also such a plenitude of power, that he can pardon
the offences of all whom he will have spared (Rom. ix. 15; John iv.
11); and subdue all his enemies, whom he will have plagued and
destroyed without being bound to render to any creature a reason of his
doing (Luke xix. 17; Psal. ii. 9; cx. 1); but making his own most holy
and just will his only most perfect and eternal law.

From all these attributes ariseth one, which is God's sovereign
blessedness or perfection.

Blessedness is that perfect and unmeasurable possession of joy and
glory, which God hath in himself for ever; [33] and is the cause of all
the bliss and perfection that every creature enjoys in its measure.

There are other attributes figuratively and improperly ascribed to God,
in the holy scriptures, as by an anthropomorphosis, the members of a
man, eyes, ears, nostrils, mouth, hands, feet, &c.; or the senses and
actions of a man, as, seeing, hearing, smelling, working, walking,
striking, &c.: by an anthropopatheia, the affections and passions of a
man, as, gladness, grief, joy, sorrow, love, hatred, &c.; or by an
analogy, as when he is named, a Lion, a Rock, a Tower, a Buckler, &c.,
whose signification every commentary will express.

Of all these attributes we must hold these general rules:--No
attributes can sufficiently express the essence of God, because it is
infinite and ineffable.

Whatsoever, therefore, is spoken of God, is not God; but serves rather
to help our weak understanding, to conceive in our reason, and to utter
in our speech, the majesty of his divine nature, so far as he hath
vouchsafed to reveal himself to us in his word.

1. All the attributes of God belong to every of the three Persons, as
well as to the essence itself, with the limitation of a personal
propriety. As the mercy of the Father is mercy begetting, the mercy of
the Son is mercy begotten, the mercy of the Holy Ghost is mercy
proceeding: and so of the rest.

2. The essential attributes of God differ not from his essence; because
they are so in the essence, that they are the very essence itself. In
God, therefore, there is nothing which is not either his essence or
person.

3. The essential attributes of God differ not essentially or really one
from another, because whatsoever is in God, is one most simple essence,
and admits no division, but only in our reason and understanding, which
being not able to know earthly things by one simple act, without the
help of many distinct acts, must of necessity have the help of many
distinct acts to know the incomprehensible God. Therefore, to speak
properly, there are not in God many attributes, but one only, which is
nothing else but the Divine Essence itself, by what attribute soever
you call it. But in respect of our reason, they are said to be so many
different attributes; for our understanding conceives by the name of
mercy, a thing different from that which is called justice. The
essential attributes of God are not therefore really separate.

4. The essential attributes of God are not parts or qualities of the
divine essence, nor accidents in the essence, nor a subject, but the
very whole and entire essence of God; so that every such attribute is
not aliud et aliud, another and another thing, but one and the same
thing. There are therefore no quantities in God, by which he may be
said to be so much and so much; nor qualities, by which he may be said
to be such and such; but whatsoever God is, he is such and the same by
his essence. By his essence he is wise, and therefore wisdom itself; by
his essence he is good, and therefore goodness itself; by his essence
he is merciful, aud therefore mercy itself; by his essence he is just,
and therefore justice itself, &c. In a word, God is great, without
quantity; good, true, and just, without quality; merciful, without
passion; an act, without motion; everywhere present, without sight;
without time, the first and the last; the Lord of all creatures, from
whom all receive themselves, and all the good they have, yet neither
needeth nor receiveth he any increase of goodness or happiness from any
other. [34]

This is the plain description of God, so far as he hath revealed
himself to us in his word.

This doctrine, of all other, every true practitioner of piety must
competently know, and necessarily believe, for four special uses:--

1. That we may discern our true and only God from all false gods and
idols; for the description of God is properly known only to his church,
in whom he hath thus graciously manifested himself (Psal. clxvii. 19,
20; Jer. x. 25.)

2. To possess our hearts with a greater awe of his majesty, whilst we
admire him for his simpleness and infiniteness; adore him for his
unmeasurableness, unchangeableness, and eternity; seek wisdom from his
understanding and knowledge; submit ourselves to his blessed will and
pleasure; love him, his love, mercy, goodness, and patience; trust to
his word, because of his truth; fear him for his power, justice, and
anger; reverence him for his holiness; and praise him for his
blessedness: and to depend all our life on him, who is the only author
of our life, being, and all the good things we have.

3. To stir us up to imitate the Divine Spirit in his holy attributes,
and to bear, in some measure, the image of his wisdom, love, goodness,
justice, mercy, truth, patience, zeal, and anger against sin; that we
may be wise, loving, just, merciful, true, patient, and zealous, as our
God is.

4. Lastly, that we may in our prayers and meditations conceive aright
of his divine majesty, and not according to those gross and blasphemous
imaginations which naturally arise in men's brains, as when they
conceive God to be like an old man sitting in a chair; and the blessed
Trinity to be like that tripartite idol which papists have painted in
their church windows.

When, therefore, thou art to pray to God, let thine heart speak to him
as to that eternal, infinite, almighty, holy, wise, just, merciful
Spirit, and most perfect, indivisible essence of three several persons,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; who being present in all places, ruleth
heaven and earth, understandeth all men's hearts, knoweth all men's
miseries, and is only able to bestow on us all graces which we want,
and to deliver all penitent sinners who with faithful hearts seek, for
Christ's sake, his help out of all their afflictions and troubles
(Psal. xc. 2; 1 Kings viii. 27, 30; Gen. xvii. 1; Job xv. 25; Isa. vi.
3; Rev. iv. 8; xv. 4; Rom. xi. 33; xvi. 17; Deut. xxxii. 4; Psal. cxlv.
8, 9, 17; ciii. 11; John iv. 24; 1 John v. 7; Matt. iii. 16; xxviii.
19; 2 Cor. xiii. 14; Jer. xxiii. 24; Dan. iv. 32; Jer. xvii. 10; Acts
i. 24.)

The ignorance of this true knowledge of God makes many to make an idol
of the true God, and is the only cause why so many profess all other
parts of God's worship and religion with so much irreverence and
hypocrisy;--whereas, if they did truly know God, they durst not but
come to his holy service; and coming, serve him with fear and
reverence: for so far doth a man fear God as he knoweth him; and then
doth a man truly know, God, when he joins practice to speculation: and
that is,

First, when a man doth so acknowledge and celebrate God's majesty, as
he hath revealed himself in his word.

Secondly, when, from the true and lively sense of God's attributes,
there is bred in a man's heart a love, awe, and confidence in God; for
saith God himself, "If I be a Father, where is my honour? if I be a
Lord, where is my fear?" "O taste and see that the Lord is good!" saith
David, Psal. xxxiv. 9. He that hath not by experience tasted his
goodness, knows not how good he is. "He" (saith John) "that saith he
knoweth God, and keepeth not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth
is not in him," 1 John ii. 4. So far, therefore, as we imitate God in
his goodness, love, justice, mercy, patience, and other attributes, so
far do we know him.

Thirdly, when with inward groans, and the serious desires of our
hearts, we long to attain to the perfect and plenary knowledge of his
majesty, in the life which is to come.

Lastly, this discovers how few there are who do truly know God; for no
man knoweth God, but he that loveth him; and how can a man choose but
love him, being the sovereign good, if he know him, seeing the nature
of God is to enamour with the love of his goodness? and whosoever
loveth anything more than God, is not worthy of God; and such is every
one who settles the love and rest of his heart upon anything besides
God. If, therefore, thou dost believe that God is almighty, why dost
thou fear devils and enemies, and not confidently trust in God, and
crave his help in all thy troubles and dangers?--if thou believest that
God is infinite, how darest thou provoke him to anger?--if thou
believest that God is simple, with what heart canst thou dissemble and
play the hypocrite?--if thou believest that God is the sovereign good,
why is not thy heart more settled upon him than on all worldly
good?--if thou dost indeed believe that God is a just Judge, how darest
thou live so securely in sin without repentance?--if thou dost truly
believe that God is most wise, why dost not thou refer the events of
crosses and disgraces to him who knoweth how to turn all things to the
best unto them that love him? (Rom. viii. 28)--if thou art persuaded
that God is true, why dost thou doubt of his promises?--and if thou
believest that God is beauty and perfection itself, why dost not thou
make him alone the chief end of all thine affections and desires? for
if thou lovest beauty, he is most fair; if thou desirest riches, he is
most wealthy; if thou seekest wisdom, he is most wise. Whatsoever
excellency thou hast seen in any creature, it is nothing but a sparkle
of that which is in infinite perfection in God: and when in heaven we
shall have an immediate communion with God, we shall have them all
perfectly in him communicated to us. Briefly, in all goodness, he is
all in all. Love that one good God, and thou shalt love him in whom all
the good of goodness consisteth. He that would therefore attain to the
saving-knowledge of God, must learn to know him by love: for God is
love, and the knowledge of the love of God passeth all knowledge (Eph.
iii. 19; 1 John iv.) For all knowledge besides to know how to love God,
and to serve him only, is nothing, upon Solomon's credit, but vanity of
vanities, and vexation of spirit (Eccles. i. 17.)

Kindle therefore, O Lord, the love of thyself in my soul especially,
seeing it was thy good pleasure that, being reconciled by the blood of
Christ (Rom. v. 9, 10; John xvii. 3, 22; 1 Cor. xv. 8), I should be
brought, by the knowledge of thy grace, to the communion of thy glory,
wherein only consists my sovereign good and happiness for ever.

Thus, by the light of his own word, we have seen the back parts of
Jehovah Elohim, the Eternal Trinity; whom to believe is saving faith
and verity; and unto whom from all creatures in heaven and earth, be
all praise, dominion, and glory for ever. Amen.

Thus far of the knowledge of God. Now of the knowledge of a man's self.
And first of the state of his misery and corruption without renovation
by Christ.

[9] Origo essentiæ in divinis nulla est, origo personarum locum habet
in Filio, et Spiritu Sancto; Pater enim est prior Filio, non tempore,
sed ordine--Alsted.

[10] Ideo dicitur pater anarchos et agennetos.

[11] Films Dei hologos, quoad essentiam absolutam, est quidem à seipso
et autotheos, sed ratione tropou hupraxeos, sive esse personalis per
æternam generationem à Patre existit: ideoque non est autousios (John
vi. 38; v. 19; Mic. v. 1; John i. 1.)

[12] Therefore (Rom. viii. 9) the Holy Ghost i» called the Spirit of
Christ.

[14] Spiritus S. à Patre, et à Filio procedit, tanquam ab uno et eodem
principio, in duabus tantum personis subsidente, non autem tamquam à
duobus ac diversis principis.

[15] Infirmitates meræ privationes non pravæ dispositionis.

[16] Humana natura est distinctum individuum à natura divina, etsi non
sit distincta persona.--Keck. Syst. Theol. lib. iii. page 119.

[17] As Redemption (Acts xx. 28) and Sanctification (1 Pet. i. 2) to
the Father; Creation (1 John iii.) and Sanctification (1 Cor. i. 2) to
the Son; Creation (Psal. xxxiii. 6) and Redemption (Eph. iv. 30) to the
Holy Ghost; jointly all to each (1 Cor. vi. 11.) Opera Trinitatis ad
extra indivisa, ad intus divisa.

[18] Jehovah non habet plurale, et in scripturis soli vero Deo
tribuitur.

[19] Deus est causa causarum et ens entium.

[20] Hence Eli in Hebrew (as Matth. xxvii. 46), and Eloi in Syriac (as
Mark xv. 31), doth signify my God (2 Chron. xxxii. 8.)

[21] (The LXX. turns it paetokrator.) It is derived of Dai,
sufficiency, and the relative s, the same as autarkes, self-sufficient,
(autos and arkeo.)

[22] A name compounded of ai, my, and Adon, Lord. Adon derivatur ab
Eden, basis, quia Deus est fundamentum et sustentator omnium
creaturarum. Hinc Adon, Dominus, cui rei domesticæ cura incumbit, et ei
tanquam columnæ innititur. Quando de creaturis usurpatur Adonai, est
Jod cum patach: Sed de Creatore cum cametz. Ab Adonai manasse videtur
Ethnicorum Athena.

[23] So the Devil styled Christ, The most High (Luke viii. 28.)

[24] Poenitentia cum de Deo enunciatur, non affectum in Deo, sed
effectum Dei in hominibus significat.--Alsttd.

[25] Creaturæ quædam æternæ sunt a posteriori: a priori solus Deus est
æternus.--Alsted. Lex, Theol. cap. 2.

[26] Hence it is that God is called of the Hebrews Eheje, so likewise
Echeje; and as of the Grecians, ho on, so also ho zon; and as of the
Latins, primum ens, so also primum vivens; for, to be, and to live, is
all one and the same in God.

[27] Intellectus scientia et sapientia in Deo non
distinguuntur.--Tilen. Nam sapientia in homine est habitus intellectui
impressus, qui de Deo dici non debet, cujus intellectus est ipsa
sapientia.--Keckerm. Panta idon Dmos ophthalmos kai panta noesas. Hes.
ib. erga kai hemir. Sap. Hence the Platonics term God ephopten,
all-eye, seeing all.

[28] In creaturis multa inveniuntur bona, ergo Creator multo magis est
bonus. Imo autagathon, ipsum bonum.

[29] Veritas est harmonia tum intellectus et verborum cum rebus, tum
etiam rerum ipsarum cum Ideis in mente divina.--Keckerm. Veritas Dei in
verbis, fides Dei dicitur, quod certo fiant, quæ ab ipso dicta sunt.
Item constantia, quia sententiam non mutat.--Polan.

[30] Ira Dei non est aliud quam voluntas puniendi.--Aug. 15, de Civit.
Dei, c. 15. Ansel, lib. vii. cap. 6. Cur Deus Hom. furor et ira in Deo,
non passionem mentis, sed ultionis acerbitatem notant.--Carth. in Apoc.
19.

[31] Deus potest omnia quæ contradictionem non implicant.--Aqu. i. qu.
25, art 3, 4. Omnia potentia excludit omnes defectus, qui sunt
impotentia, seu, posse mentiri, mori, peccare, &c.

[32] Hinc Deus dicitur, autokrator.

[33] Deus est Sharldi, sive autarkes, non solum quia Ipse nihil
desiderat, sed etiam quia nihil in eo desiderari potest. Creaturas
fecit perfectas in suo quasque genere, ergo ipse perfectissimus est in
se et per se.--Scal. Exerc. 146, sect. 2. (Mark xiv. 61; Acts xvii. 25;
Rom. xi. 35, 36; 1 Tim. vi. 15; Matt. xxv. 36; James i. 17.)

[34] Exhibet omnia, accipit nihil; ipsum igitur bonum, est Deus ipse
semper.--Trisnæy. serm. ii. Plin.
