<p>
  <a class="prev" href="02.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="04.html">Next</a>
</p>

## Meditations of the State of a Christian Reconciled to God in Christ,

Now let us see how happy a godly man is in his state of renovation,
being reconciled to God in Christ.

The godly man whose corrupt nature is renewed by grace in Christ and
become a new creature, is blessed in a threefold respect--First, in his
life; Secondly, in his death; Thirdly, after death.

I. His blessedness during his life is but in part, and that consists in
seven things:--

1. Because he is conceived of the Spirit (John iii. 5), and is born,
not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but
of God (John i. 13), who in Christ is his Father (Gal. iv. 6, 7; 2 Cor.
ix. 8:) so that the image of God his Father is renewed in him every day
more and more (Ephesians 4:2,3,13; Col. iii. 10.)

2. He has, for the merits of Christ's sufferings, all his sins,
original and actual, with the guilt and punishment belonging to them
(Rom. iv. 8, 25; viii. 1, 2; 1 Pet. ii. 24), freely and fully forgiven
him; and all the righteousness of Christ as freely and fully imputed to
him (Rom. iv. 5, 19;) and so God is reconciled to him (2 Cor. v. 19;)
and approveth him as righteous in his sight and account (Rom. viii. 33,
34.)

3. He is freed from Satan's bondage (Act. xvi. 18; Eph. ii. 2), and is
made a brother of Christ (John xx. 17; Rom. viii. 20), a fellow-heir of
his heavenly kingdom (Rom. viii. 17), and a spiritual king and priest
(Rev. i. 6), to offer up spiritual sacrifices to God by Jesus Christ (1
Pet. ii. 5; Mal. iii. 17.)

4. God spareth him as a man spareth his own son that serveth him. And
this sparing consists in,

(1.) Not taking notice of every fault, but bearing with his infirmities
(Exod. xxxiv. 6, 7.) A loving father will not cast his child out of
doors in his sickness.

(2.) Not making his punishment, when he is chastened, as great as his
deserts (Psal. ciii. 10.)

(3.) Chastening him moderately when he seeth that he will not by any
other means be reclaimed (2 Sam. vii. 14, 15; 1 Cor. xi. 32.)

(4.) Graciously accepting his endeavours, notwithstanding the
imperfection of his obedience; and so preferring the willingness of his
mind before the worthiness of his work (2 Cor. viii. 12.)

(5.) Turning the curses which he deserved to crosses and fatherly
corrections; yea, all things, all calamities of this life, death
itself, yea, his very sins, to his good (Rom. viii. 28; Psal. lxxxix.
31, 33; cxix. 71; Heb. xii. 10; 2 Cor. xii. 7; 1 Cor. xv. 54, 55;
Hebrews 2:14,15; Luke xxii. 31, 32; Psal. li. 13, 14; Rom. v. 20, 21.)

5. God gives him his Holy Spirit, which,

(1.) Sanctifies him by degrees throughout (1 Thess. v. 23), so that he
more and more dies to sin and lives to righteousness (Rom. viii. 5,
10.)

(2.) Assures him of his adoption, and that he is by grace the child of
God (Rom. viii. 16.)

(3.) Encourages him to come with boldness and confidence into the
presence of God (Heb. iv. 16; Eph. iii. 12.)

(4.) Moves him without fear to say unto him, Abba, Father (Gal. iv 6;
Rom. viii. 15, 16.)

(5.) Pours into his heart the gift of sanctified prayer.

(6.) Persuades him that both he and his prayers are accepted and heard
of God, for Christ his mediator's sake.

(7.) Fills him with, 1st, Peace of conscience (Rom. v. 1; xiv. 17;) 2d,
Joy in the Holy Ghost (Rom. xiv. 17:) in comparison whereof all earthly
joys seem vain and vile to him.

6. He has a recovery of his sovereignty over the creatures (Psal. viii.
5, &c.; Heb. ii. 7, 8), which he lost by Adam's fall; and from thence
free liberty (Rom. xiv. 14; 1 Tim. iv. 2, &c.) of using all things
which God hath not restrained (1 Cor. ix. 19, 20), so that he may use
them with a good conscience (1 Cor. iii. 22, 32; Heb. i. 7.) For to all
things in heaven and earth he hath a sure title in this life (1 Cor.
iii. 22;) and he shall have the plenary and peaceable possession of
them in the life to come (Matt. xxv. 34; 1 Pet. i. 4.) Hence it is that
all reprobates are but usurpers of all that they possess, and have no
place of their own but hell (Acts i. 25.)

7. He has the assurance of God's fatherly care and protection day and
night over him; which care consists in three things:

(1.) In providing all things necessary for his soul and body,
concerning this life (Matt. vi. 32; 2 Cor. xii. 14; Psal. xxiii; xxxiv.
9, 10), and that which is to come; so that he shall be sure ever either
to have enough, or patience to be content with that he hath.

(2.) In that God gives his holy angels, as ministers, a charge to
attend upon him always for his good (Heb. i. 14; Psal. xxxiv. 7; xci.
11;) yea, in danger to pitch their tents about him for his safety
wherever he be: yea, God's protection shall defend him as a cloud by
day, and as a pillar of fire by night (Isa. iv. 5;) and his providence
shall hedge him from the power of the devil (Job i. 10.)

(3.) In that the eyes of the Lord are upon him, and his ears
continually open, to see his state (Psal. xxxiv. 15; Gen. vii. 1), and
to hear his complaint, and in his good time to deliver him out of all
his troubles (Psal. xxxiv. 19.)

Thus far of the blessed state of the godly and regenerate man in this
life: Now of his blessed state in death,

## Meditations of the blessed state of a Regenerate Man in his Death.

When God sends death as his messenger for the regenerate man, he meets
him half-way to heaven, for his conversation and affection is there
before him (Phil. iii. 20; Col. iii. 2.) Death is never strange nor
fearful to him: not strange, because he died daily--not fearful,
because whilst he lived, he was dead, and his life was hid with Christ
in God (1 Cor. i. 31; Col. iii. 3;) to die, therefore, is to him
nothing else in effect, but to rest from his labour in this world, to
go home to his Father's house, unto the city of the living God, the
heavenly Jerusalem, to an innumerable company of angels, to the general
assembly and church of the first-born, to God the Judge of all, and to
the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the
new covenant (Rev. xiv. 13; 2 Cor. v. 6; John xiv. 2; Heb. xii. 22,
&c.) Whilst his body is sick, his mind is sound; for God maketh his bed
in sickness, and strengthened him with faith and patience, upon his bed
of sorrow (Psal. xli. 3.) And when he begins to enter into the way of
all the world, he giveth (like Jacob, Moses, and Joshua) to his
children and friends, godly exhortations and counsels, to serve the
true God, to worship Him truly all the days of their life (Gen. xlix.)
His blessed soul breatheth nothing but blessings, and such speeches as
savour a sanctified spirit. As his outward man decayeth, so his inward
man increaseth, and waxeth stronger; when the speech of his tongue
faltereth, the sighs of his heart speak louder unto God; when the sight
of the eyes faileth, the Holy Ghost illuminates him inwardly with
abundance of spiritual light. His soul feareth not, but is bold to go
out of the body, and to dwell with her Lord (2 Cor. v. 8.) He sigheth
out with Paul, Cupio dissolvi, "I desire to be dissolved and to be with
Christ," Phil. i. 23. And with David, "As the hart panteth after the
water-brooks, so panteth my soul after thee, O God. My soul thirsteth
for God, for the living God: when shall I come and appear before God?"
Psal. xlii. 2. He prayeth with the saints, "How long, O Lord, which art
holy and true?" Rev. vi. 10. "Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly," Rev.
xxii. 10. And when the appointed time of his dissolution is come (Job
xiv. 5), knowing that he goeth to his Father and Redeemer in the peace
of a good conscience (Psal. xxxi. 5), and the assured persuasion of the
forgiveness of all his sins, in the blood of the Lamb, he sings with
blessed old Simeon his Nunc dimittis, "Lord, now lettest thou thy
servant depart in peace," (Luke ii. 29; Psal. xxxvii. 37; Isa. lvii.
2), and surrenders up his soul, as it were, with his own hands, into
the hands of his heavenly Father, 6aying with David, "Into thy hands, O
Father, I commend my soul, for thou hast redeemed me, O Lord, thou God
of truth," Psal. xxxi. 5. And saying with Stephen, "Lord Jesus, receive
my spirit," Acts vii. 59; he no sooner yields up the ghost, but
immediately the holy angels (Matt. xviii. 10; Acts xii. 15; xxvii. 23)
who attended upon him from his. birth to his death, carry and accompany
his soul into heaven, as they did the soul of Lazarus into Abraham's
bosom (Luke xvi. 22), which is the kingdom of heaven, whither only good
angels and good works do accompany the soul (Matt. viii. 11; Luke xiii.
28; Acts xv. 10, 11; Eph. i. 10; Heb. xi. 9, 10, 16; xii. 22, 23; Luke
xix. 9; ix. 31;) the one to deliver their charge (Psal. xci. 11; Heb.
i. 14;) the other to receive their reward (Rev. xiv. 13; xxii. 12.)

The body, in convenient time, as the sanctified temple of the Holy
Ghost (1 Cor. vi. 19), the members of Christ (1 Cor. vi. 15), nourished
by his body (Mat. xxvi. 26), the price of the blood of the Son of God
(1 Cor. vi. 20; 1 Pet. i. 19), is by his fellow-brethren reverently
laid to sleep in the grave as in the bed of Christ (1 Thess. iv. 14;
Acts vii. 6; viii. 2), in an assured hope to awake in the resurrection
of the just, at the last day, to be partaker, with the soul, of life
and glory everlasting (Dan. xii. 2; John v. 28, 29; Luke xiv. 14; 1
Thess. iv. 16, 17; Rev. xiv. 13.) And in this respect not only the
souls, but the very bodies of the faithful also are termed blessed.

Thus far of the blessedness of the soul and body of the regenerate man
in death: Now let us see the blessedness of bis soul and body after
death.

## Meditations of the blessed state of the Regenerate Man after Death.

This estate has three degrees:--1st, From the day of death to the
resurrection; 2d, From the resurrection to the pronouncing of the
sentence; 3d, After the sentence, which lasts eternally.

As soon as ever the regenerate man hath yielded up his soul to Christ,
the holy angels take her into their custody, and immediately carry her
into heaven (Luke xvi. 22), and there present her before Christ, where
she is crowned with a crown of righteousness and glory; not which she
hath deserved by her good works, but which God hath promised of his
free goodness to all those who, of love, have in this life unfeignedly
served him, and sought Ms glory (Heb. i. 14; xii. 24; 2 Tim. iv. 8;
Rev. ii. 10; 1 Pet. v. 4.)

Oh, what joy will it be to thy soul, which was wont to see nothing but
misery and sinners, now to behold the face of the God of glory! yea, to
see Christ welcoming thee, as soon as thou art presented before him by
the holy angels, with an Euge bone serve! "Well done, and welcome good
and faithful servant, &c., enter into thy Master's joy." And what joy
will this be, to behold thousand thousands of cherubims, seraphims,
angels, thrones, dominions, principalities, powers! (Col. i. 6; Eph. i.
21.) All the holy patriarchs, priests, prophets, apostles, martyrs,
confessors, and all the souls of thy friends, parents, husbands, wives,
children, and the rest of God's saints, who departed before thee in the
true faith of Christ, standing before God's throne in bliss and glory?
If the Queen of Sheba, beholding the glory and attendance given to
Solomon, as it were ravished therewith, brake out and said, "Happy are
thy men, happy are these thy servants, which stand ever before thee,
and hear thy wisdom," (1 Kings x. 8), how shall thy soul be ravished to
see herself by grace admitted to stand with this glorious company, to
behold tie blessed face of Christ, and to hear all the treasures of his
divine wisdom; how shalt thou rejoice to see so many thousand thousands
welcoming thee into their heavenly society (Luke xv;) for as they all
rejoiced at thy conversion, so will they now be much more joyful to
behold thy coronation, and to see thee receive thy crown, which was
laid up for thee against thy coming (1 Tim. iv. 8.) There the crown of
martyrdom shall be put on the head of the martyr, who for Christ's
gospel's sake endured torments--the crown of piety on the head of them
who sincerely professed Christ--the crown of good works on the good
alms-giver's head, who liberally relieved the poor--the crown of
incorruptible glory on the head of those pastors, who by their
preaching and good example have converted souls from the corruption of
sin, to glorify God in holiness of life. Who can sufficiently express
the rejoicing of this heavenly company, to see thee thus crowned with
glory (Rev. vii. 9), arrayed with the shining robes of righteousness,
and to behold the palm of victory put into thy hand! O what gratulation
will there be, that thou hast escaped all the miseries of the world,
the snares of the devil, the pains of hell, and obtained with them thy
eternal rest and happiness! for there every one joyeth as much in
another's happiness as in his own, because he shall see him as much
loved of God as himself; yea, they have as many distinct joys as they
have copartners of their joy. And in this joyful and blessed state, the
soul resteth with Christ in heaven till the resurrection; when the
number of her fellow-servants and brethren shall have been fulfilled,
which the Lord termeth but a little season (Rev. vii. 9.)

The second degree of man's blessedness after death, is from the
resurrection to the pronouncing of the final sentence. For at the last
day,

1. The elementary heavens, earth, and all things therein, shall be
dissolved, and purified with fire (2 Pet. ii. 10, 12, 13.)

2. At the sound of the last trumpet, or voice of Christ, the Archangel,
the very same bodies which the elect had before (though turned to dust
and earth) shall arise again (1 Cor. xv. 52; 1 Thess. iv. 16; John v.
28; Ezek. xxxvii. 7, 8, &c.) And in the same instant, every man's soul
shall re-enter into his own body, by virtue of the resurrection of
Christ, their head (Rom. viii. 11; Phil. iii. 10, 11; 1 Thess. iv. 14),
and be made alive and rise out of their graves, as if they did but
awake out of their beds (Rom. v. 17; 1 Cor. xv. 22.) And howsoever
tyrants bemangled their bodies in pieces, or consumed them to ashes,
yet shall the elect find it true at that day, that not an hair of their
head is perished (Matt. xix. 30.)

3. They shall come forth out of their graves, like so many Josephs out
of prison; or Daniels out of the lion's den; or Jonahs out of the
whale's belly; [35] (1 Thess. iv. 14; Dan. vi. 23.)

4. All the bodies of the elect being thus made alive, shall arise in
that perfection of nature whereunto they should have attained by their
natural temperament, if no impediment had hindered (Isa. lxv. 20); and
in that vigour of age that a perfect man is at about three and thirty
years old, each in their proper sex. To which divines think the apostle
alludes when he saith, "Till we all come unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the age (or stature) of the fulness of Christ," Eph. iv. 13.
Whatsoever imperfection was before in the body (as blindness, lameness,
crookedness) shall then be done away. Jacob shall not halt, nor Isaac
be blind, nor Leah blear-eyed, nor Mephibosheth lame: for if David
would not have the blind and lame to come into his house, much less
will Christ have blindness and lameness to dwell in his heavenly
habitation. Christ made all the blind to see, the dumb to speak, the
deaf to hear, the lame to walk, that came to him to seek his grace on
earth: much more will he heal all their imperfections whom he will
admit to his glory in heaven. Among those tribes, there is not one
feeble; but the lame man shall leap as an hart, and the dumb man's
tongue shall sing (Psal. cv. 37; Isa. xxxv. 6.) And it is very
probable, that seeing God created our first parents, not infants, or
old men, but of a perfect age or stature, the anaplasis, or new
creation from death, shall every way be more perfect than the plasis,
or first frame of man, from which he fell into the state of the dead.
Neither is it like that infancy, being imperfection, and old age
corruption, can well stand with the state of a perfect glorified body.

5. The bodies of the elect being thus raised, shall have four most
excellent and supernatural qualities: For,

(1.) They shall be raised in power, whereby they shall for ever be
freed from all wants and weakness, and enabled to continue, without the
use of meat, drink, sleep, and other former helps (1 Cor. xv. 43.)

(2.) In incorruption, whereby they shall never be subject to any manner
of imperfections, blemish, sickness, or death (1 Cor. xv. 41; Isa. lxv.
20.)

(3.) In glory, whereby their bodies shall shine as bright as the sun in
the firmament (Matt. xiii. 43; Luke ix. 31;) and which being made
transparent, their souls shall shine through far more glorious than
their bodies (1 Thess. iv. 17.) Three glimpses of which glory were
seen--first, in Moses's face (Exod. xxxiv. 29;) secondly, in the
Transfiguration (Matt. xvii. 2;) thirdly, in Stephen's countenance
(Acts vi. 15:) three instances and assurances of the glorification of
our bodies at that glorious day. Then shall David lay aside his
shepherd's weed, and put on the robe of the King's Son, Jesus, not
Jonathan's (1 Sam. xviii. 4.) Then every true Mordecai (who mourned
under the sackcloth of this corrupt flesh) shall be arrayed with the
King's royal apparel (Esther i. 4), and have the crown-royal set upon
his head, that all the world may see how it shall be done to him whom
the King of kings delighteth to honour. If now the rising of one sun
make the morning so glorious, how glorious shall that day be, when
innumerable millions of millions of bodies of saints and angels shall
appear more glorious than the brightness of the sun, the body of Christ
in glory surpassing all!

(4.) In agility, whereby our bodies shall be able to ascend, and meet
the Lord at his glorious coming in the air, as eagles flying unto their
blessed carcase (Matt. xxiv. 28.) To this agility of the glorious
bodies of the saints the prophet alludes, saying, "They shall renew
their strength; they shall mount up with wings as eagles; they Shall
run, and not be weary; they shall walk, and not faint," Isa. xl. 31.
And to this state may that saying of Wisdom be referred: "In the time
of their vision they shall shine, and run to and fro, as sparks among
the stubble."

And in respect of these four qualities, Paul calleth the raised bodies
of the elect spiritual (1 Cor. xv. 46;) for they shall be spiritual in
qualities, but the same still in substance.

And howsoever sin and corruption make a man, in this state of
mortality, lower than angels, yet surely, when God shall thus crown him
with glory and honour (Psal. viii. 5), I cannot see how man shall be
anything inferior to angels. For are they spirits? so is man also in
respect of his soul: yea, more than this, they shall have also a
spiritual body, fashioned like unto the glorious body of the Lord Jesus
Christ (Phil. iii. 21), in whom man's nature is exalted by a personal
union into the glory of the Godhead, and individual society of the
blessed Trinity (Heb. ii. 16), an honour which he never vouchsafed
angels: and in this respect man hath a prerogative above them. Nay,
they are but spirits appointed to be ministers unto the elect (Heb. i.
14; Psal. xci. 11;) and as many of them, who at the first disdained
this office, and would not keep their first standing, were for their
pride hurled into hell (Jude, ver. 6; 2 Pet. ii. 4.) This lesseneth not
the dignity of angels, but extols the greatness of God's love to
mankind.

But as for all the elect, who at that second and sudden coming of
Christ shall be found quick and living, the fire that shall burn up the
corruption of the world, and the works therein, shall in a moment, in
the twinkling of an eye, overtake them as it finds them, either
grinding in the mill of provision, or walking in the fields of
pleasure, or lying in the bed of ease (2 Pet. iii. 10, 11, 12; 1 Cor.
xv. 51; Luke xvii. 31;) and so (burning up their dross and corruption)
of mortal, make them immortal bodies: and this change shall be unto
them instead of death.

Then shall the soul with joyfulness greet her body, saying, O well met
again, my dear sister: How sweet is thy voice! How comely is thy
countenance, having lain hid so long in the clefts of the rocks, and in
the secret places of the grave! (Canticles ii. 14.) Thou art indeed an
habitation fit, not only for me to dwell in, but such as the Holy Ghost
thinks meet to reside in, as his temple, for ever. The winter of our
affliction is now past; the storm of our misery is blown over and gone.
The bodies of our elect brethren appear more glorious than the
lily-flowers on the earth; the time of singing hallelujah is come, and
the voice of the trumpet is heard in the land. Thou hast been my
yoke-fellow in the Lord's labours, and companion in persecutions and
wrongs, for Christ and his gospel's sake; now shall we enter together
into our Master's joy. As thou hast borne with me the cross, so shalt
thou now wear with me the crown. As thou hast with me sowed plenteously
in tears, so shalt thou reap with me abundantly in joy. O blessed, ever
blessed be that God, who, when yonder reprobates spent their whole time
in pride, fleshly lusts, eating, drinking, and profane vanities, gave
us grace to join together in watching, fasting, praying, reading the
scriptures, keeping his sabbaths, hearing sermons, receiving the holy
communion, relieving the poor, exercising, in all humility, the works
of piety to God, and walking conscionably in the duties of our calling
towards men. Thou shalt, anon, hear no mention of thy sins, for they
are remitted and covered (Psal. xxxii. 1); but every good work which
thou hast done for the Lord's sake shall be rehearsed and rewarded.

Cheer up thy heart, for thy Judge is flesh of thy flesh, and bone of
thy bone (Dan. ix. 21, &c.) Lift up thy head, behold these glorious
angels, like so many Gabriels, flying towards us, to tell us that the
day of our redemption is come (Luke xxi. 28), and to convey us in the
clouds to meet our Redeemer in the air. Lo, they are at hand! Arise,
therefore, my dove, my love, my fair one, and come away (Cant. ii. 1,
3.) And so, like roes, or young harts (verse 17), they run with angels
towards Christ, over the trembling mountains of Bether,

6. Both quick and dead being thus revived and glorified, shall
forthwith, by the ministry of God's holy angels (Luke xvii. 34, 35,
36), be gathered from all the quarters and parts of the world, and
caught up together in the clouds, to meet the Lord, in the air (1
Thess. iv. 17), and so shall come with him, as a part of his glorious
train, to judge the reprobates and evil angels (1 Cor. vi. 1, 3.) The
twelve apostles shall sit upon twelve thrones (next Christ) to judge
the twelve tribes, who refused to hear the gospel preached by their
ministry; and all the saints, in honour and order, shall stand next to
them, as judges also, to judge the evil angels, and earthly-minded men
(1 Cor. vi. 2, 3.) And as every of them received grace in this life to
be more zealous of his glory, and more faithful in his service, than
others, so shall their glory and reward be greater than others in that
day (Rev. xxii. 12; 2 Cor. v. 6.)

The place whither they shall be gathered unto Christ, and where Christ
shall sit in judgment, shall be in the air (1 Thess. iv. 17), over the
valley of Jehoshaphat, by Mount Olivet, near to Jerusalem, eastward
from the temple, as it is probable, for four reasons:--

1. Because the holy scripture seems to intimate so much in plain words:
"I will gather all nations into the valley of Jehoshaphat and plead
with them there. [36] Cause thy mighty one to come down, O Lord: let
the heathen be awakened and come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat; for
there will I sit to judge all the heathen round about," Joel iii. 1, 2,
11, 12. Jehoshaphat signifieth, the Lord will judge. And this valley
was so called from the great victory which the Lord gave Jehoshaphat
and his people over the Ammonites, Moabites, and inhabitants of Mount
Seir (2 Chron. xx;) which victory was a type of the final victory which
Christ, the Supreme Judge, shall give his elect over all their enemies
in that place at the last day, as also the Jews interpret it--(see
Zech. xiv. 4, 5; Psal. li. 1, 2, &c.)--all agreeing that the place
shall be thereabouts.

2. Because that as Christ was thereabouts crucified and put to open
shame, so over that place his glorious throne should be erected in the
air, when he shall appear in judgment to manifest his majesty and
glory. For it is meet that Christ should in that place judge the world
with righteous judgment, where he himself was unjustly judged and
condemned.

3. Because that seeing the angels shall be sent to gather together the
elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other, it is
most probable that the place whither they shall be gathered to shall be
near Jerusalem and the valley of Jehoshaphat; which cosmographers
describe to be in the midst of the superficies of the earth: [37] if
the termini à quibus be the four parts of the world, the terminus ad
quem must be about the centre.

4. Because the angels told the disciples that as they saw Christ ascend
from Mount Olivet (Acts i. 11), which is over the valley of
Jehoshaphat, so he shall in like manner come down from heaven. This is
the opinion of Aquinas, and all the schoolmen, except Lombard and
Alexander Hales.

5. Lastly, When Christ is set in his glorious throne, and all the many
thousands of his saints and angels, shining more bright than so many
suns in glory, sitting about him (Matt. xxv. 31; Jude, ver. 14; Rev.
xx. 11, 12), and the body of Christ in glory and brightness surpassing
them all; the reprobates being separate, and remaining beneath upon the
earth (for the right hand signifieth a blessed, the left hand a cursed
estate), Christ will first pronounce the sentence of bliss upon the
elect (Matt. xix. 28;) and he will thereby increase the grief of the
reprobate that shall hear it, and he will shew himself more prone to
mercy than to judgment (Psal. cxlv. 9; Isa. xxviii. 21.) And thus, from
his throne of majesty in the air, he will, in the sight and hearing of
all the world, pronounce unto his elect, "Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the kingdom prepared for you, from the beginning of the world,"
&c. Matt. xxv. 34.

Come ye.] Here is our blessed union with Christ, and, by him, with the
whole Trinity.

Blessed.] Here is our absolution from all sins, and our plenary
endowment with all grace and happiness.

Of my Father.] Here is the author from whom, by Christ, proceeds our
felicity.

Inherit.] Here is our adoption.

The kingdom.] Behold our birth-right and possession.

Prepared.] See God's fatherly care for his chosen.

From the foundation of the world.] O the free, eternal, unchangeable
election of God!

How much are those souls bound to love God, who of his mere good will
and pleasure chose and loved them before they had done either good or
evil (Rom. ix. 3.)

For I was hungry, &c.] O the goodness of Christ, who takes notice of
all the good works of his children to reward them! How great is his
love to poor Christians, who takes every work of mercy done to them for
his sake, as if it had been done to himself! Come ye to me, in whom ye
have believed before ye saw me (John xx. 29; 1 Pet. i. 8), and whom ye
have loved and sought for with so much devotion, and through so many
tribulations. Come now from labour to rest, from disgrace to glory,
from the jaws of death to the joys of eternal life. For my sake ye have
been railed upon, reviled, and cursed (Matt. v. 11;) but now it shall
appear to all those cursed Esaus that you are the true Jacobs that
shall receive your heavenly Father's blessing; and blessed shall you
be. Your fathers, mothers, and nearest kindred, forsook and cast you
off for my truth's sake which you maintained (Psal. xxvii. 10; Matt.
xix. 29;) but now my Father will be unto you a father, and you shall be
his sons and daughters for ever (John xx. 17; 2 Cor. vi. 18.) You were
cast out of your lands and livings, and forsook all for my sake and the
gospel's: but that it may appear that you have not lost your gain, but
gained by your loss, instead of an earthly inheritance and possessions,
you shall possess with me the inheritance of my heavenly kingdom; where
you shall be for love, sons; for birth-right, heirs; for dignity,
kings; for holiness, priests; and you may be bold to enter into the
possession of it now, because my Father prepared and kept it for you
ever since the first foundation of the world was laid.

Immediately after this sentence of absolution and benediction, every
one receiveth his crown, which Christ the righteous Judge puts upon
their heads, as the reward which he hath promised, of his grace and
mercy to the faith and good works of all them that loved bis appearing
(2 Tim. iv. 8; 1 Pet. v. 4.) Then every one taking his crown from bis
head, shall lay it down, as it were, at the feet of Christ; and
prostrating themselves, shall with one heart and voice, in an heavenly
sort and consort, say, "Praise, and honour, and glory, and power, and
thanks, be unto thee, O blessed Lamb, who sittest upon the throne, wert
killed, and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred,
and tongue, and people, and nation, and hast made us unto our God kings
and priests, to reign with thee in thy kingdom for evermore. Amen."
(Rev. iv. 10.)

Then shall they sit in their thrones and order, as judges of the
reprobates, and evil angels (1 Cor. vi. 1, 2, 3, &c.; Matt. xix. 13),
by approving, and giving testimony to the righteous sentence and
judgment of Christ the Supreme Judge.

After the pronouncing of the reprobates' sentence and condemnation,
Christ will perform two solemn actions--

1. The presenting of all the elect unto his Father; "Behold, O
righteous Father, these are they whom thou gavest me: I have kept them,
and none of them is lost. I gave them thy word, and they believed it,
and the world hated them, because they were not of the world, even as I
was not of the world. And now, Father, I will that those whom thou hast
given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory, which
thou hast given me; and that I may be in them, and thou in me, that
they may be made perfect in one: that the world may know that thou hast
sent me, and that thou hast loved them as thou hast loved me." (John
xvii. 12, 14, 23, 24.)

2. Christ shall deliver up the kingdom to God, even the Father, that
is, shall cease to execute his office of mediatorship (1 Cor. xxv. 24;)
whereby, as he is King, Priest, Prophet, and Supreme Head of the
Church, he suppressed his enemies, and ruled his faithful people by his
spirit, word, and sacraments: so that his kingdom of grace over his
church in this world ceasing, he shall rule immediately, as he is God,
equal with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, in his kingdom of glory
evermore. Not that the dignity of his manhood shall be any thing
diminished; but that the glory of his Godhead shall be more manifested:
so that as he is God, he shall from thenceforth in all fulness, without
all external means, rule all in all.

From this tribunal-seat, Christ shall arise, and with all his glorious
company of elect angels and saints, he shall go up triumphantly, in
order and array, unto the heaven of heavens, with such a heavenly noise
and music, that now may that song of David be truly verified, "God is
gone up with a triumph, the Lord with the sound of the trumpets. Sing
praises to God, sing praises, sing praises to our King, sing praises:
for God is the King of all the earth, he is greatly to be exalted."
(Psal. xlvii. 4, 5, 6, 8.) And that marriage-song of John, "Let us be
glad and rejoice, and give honour to him; for the marriage of the Lamb
is come, and his wife hath made herself ready. Allelujah; for the Lord
God Omnipotent reigneth." (Rev. xix. 6, 7.)

The third and last degree of the blessed state of a regenerate man
after death, begins after the pronouncing of the sentence, and lasteth
eternally without all end.

[35] Par eat potestas Dei ad instituendos, et restituendos
homines.--Athenagor.

[36] Near this valley was Mount Moriah, where Abraham sacrificed Isaac
(Gen. xxii;) Jacob saw angels ascending and descending on a ladder
(Gen. xxviii;) the angel put up his sword, and fire from heaven burnt
the sacrifice in Araunah's floor (2 Sam. xxiv;) Solomon builded the
Temple (2 Chr. iii. 1;) Christ preached the gospel, suffered his
passion, and entered into his glory.--Carth. in Gen. xxviii.

[37] The sea beyond Jordan towards Tyrus cutteth the midst of the
world. And Hezekiah saith of Jerusalem, In medio gentium posui eam,
That from Sion, as from a centre, the law should be published to all
nations; and there all nations shall be judged according to the law
(Rom. ii. 12.)

## Meditations of the blessed state of a Regenerate Man in Heaven.

Here my meditation dazzles, and my pen falls out of my hand; the one
being not able to conceive, nor the other to describe, that most
excellent bliss, and eternal weight of glory (2 Cor. iv. 17; Rom. viii.
18)--whereof all the afflictions of this present life are not
worthy--which all the elect shall with the blessed Trinity enjoy, from
that time that they shall be received with Christ, as joint-heirs (Rom.
viii. 17) into that everlasting kingdom of joy.

Notwithstanding, we may take a scantling thereof. The holy scriptures
thus set forth (to our capacity) the glory of our eternal and heavenly
life after death, in four respects--1st, Of the place; 2d, Of the
object; 3d, Of the prerogatives of the elect there; 4th, Of the effects
of these prerogatives.

### Of the Place.

The place is the heaven of heavens, or the third heaven, called
paradise (Psal. xix. 5; 2 Cor. xii. 24;) whither Christ (in his human
nature) ascended far above all visible heavens. The bridegroom's
chamber (Psal. xix. 5; Matt. xxv. 10), which by the firmament, as by an
azured curtain spangled with glittering stars, and glorious planets, is
hid, that we cannot behold it with these corruptible eyes of flesh. The
Holy Ghost framing himself to our weakness, describes the glory of that
place (which no man can estimate) by such things as are most precious
in the estimation of man; and therefore likeneth it to a great and holy
city, named the heavenly Jerusalem (Rev. xxi. 2, &c.), where only God
and his people who are saved, and written in the Lamb's book (ver. 24 &
27), do inhabit; all built of pure gold, like unto clear glass or
crystal (ver. 11, 18, 19, 20;) the walls of jasper-stone: the
foundations of the walls garnished with twelve manner of precious
stones, having twelve gates, each built of one pearl (ver. 21:) three
gates towards each of the four corners of the world (ver. 13), and at
each gate an angel (ver. 12), as so many porters, that no unclean thing
should enter into it (ver. 27.) It is four square (ver. 16), therefore
perfect: the length, the breadth, and height of it are equal, 12,000
furlongs every way; therefore glorious and spacious. Through the midst
of her streets ever runneth a pure river of the water of life, as clear
as crystal (Rev. xxii. 1); and on the other side the river is the tree
of life (ver. 2), ever growing, which bears twelve manner of fruits,
and gives fruit every month; and the leaves of the tree are health to
the nations. There is therefore no place so glorious by creation, so
beautiful with delectation, so rich in possession, so comfortable for
habitation. For there, the king is Christ---the law is love--the
honour, verity--the peace, felicity--the life, eternity. There is light
without darkness, mirth without sadness, health without sickness,
wealth without want, credit without disgrace, beauty without blemish,
ease without labour, riches without rust, blessedness without misery,
and consolation that never knoweth an end. How truly may we cry out
with David, of this city, "Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou
city of God!" Psal. lxxxvii. 3; and yet all these things are spoken but
according to the weakness of our capacity. For heaven exceedeth all
this in glory, so far, as that no tongue is able to express, nor heart
of man to conceive, the glory thereof, as witnesseth St. Paul (2 Cor.
xii. 4; 1 Cor. ii. 5), who was in it, and saw it. O let us not then
dote so much upon these wooden cottages, and houses of mouldering clay,
which are but the tents of ungodliness, and habitation of sinners; but
let us look rather, and long for this heavenly city, whose builder and
maker is God (Heb. xi. 10;) which he, who is not ashamed to be called
our God hath prepared for us (Heb. xi. 6.}

### Of the Object.

The blissful and glorious object of all intellectual and reasonable
creatures in heaven is the Godhead, in Trinity of Persons, without
which there is neither joy nor felicity; but the very fulness of joy
consisteth in enjoying the same.

This, object we shall enjoy two ways:--

1. By a beatific vision of God.

2. By possessing an immediate communion with this divine nature.

The beatifical vision of God is that only that can content the infinite
mind of man. For every thing tendeth to its centre. God is the centre
of the soul: therefore, like Noah's dove, she cannot rest nor joy till
she return and enjoy him.

All that God bestowed upon Moses could not satisfy his mind, unless he
might see the face of God (Exod. iii. 13:) therefore the whole church
prayeth so earnestly, "God be merciful unto us, and cause his face to
shine upon us." (Psal. lxvii. l, and lxxx. 1.) When Paul once had seen
this blessed sight, he ever after counted all the riches and glory of
the world (in respect of it) to be but dung (Phil. iii. 8, 11); and all
his life after was but a sighing out (cupio dissolvi), "I desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ." (Phil. i. 23.) And Christ prayed for
all his elect in his last prayer, that they might obtain this blessed
vision: "Father, I will that they which thou hast given me be (where?)
even where I am, (to what end?) that they may behold my glory," &c.
(John xvii. 14.) If Moses's face did so shine, when he had been with
God but forty days, and seen but his back parts (Exod. xxxiv. 29;
xxxiii. 31), how shall we shine, when we shall see him face to face for
ever, and know him as we are known, and as he is! (1 Cor. xiii. 12; 2
Cor. iii. 18; 1 John iii. 2.) Then shall the soul no longer be termed
Marah, bitterness, but Naomi, beautifulness; for the Lord shall turn
her short bitterness to an eternal beauty and blessedness (Ruth i. 20.)

The second means to enjoy this object is, by having-an immediate and an
eternal communion with God in heaven. This we have,--first, by being,
as members of Christ, united to his manhood, and as by the manhood,
personally united to the Word, we are united to him, as he is God; and,
by his Godhead, to the whole Trinity. Reprobates at the last day see
God, as a just Judge, to punish them; but, for lack of this communion,
they shall have neither grace with him, nor glory from him. For want of
this communion, the devils, when they saw Christ, cried out, Quid nobis
tecum? "What have we to do with thee, O Son of the most high God?"
(Mark v. 7.) But, by virtue of this communion, the penitent soul may
boldly go and say unto Christ, as Ruth unto Boaz (Ruth iii. 9),
"Spread, O Christ, the wing of the garment of thy mercy over thine
handmaid; for thou art my kinsman." This communion God promised
Abraham, when he gave himself for his great reward (Gen. xv. 1.) And
Christ prayeth for his whole church to obtain it (John xvii. 20, 21.)
This communion St. Paul expresseth in one word, saying, that God shall
be all in all to us (1 Cor. xv. 28.) Indeed, God is now all in all to
us; but by means, and in a small measure. But in heaven, God himself
immediately, in fulness of measure, without all means, will be unto us
all the good things that our souls and bodies can wish or desire. He
himself will be salvation and joy to our souls, life and health to our
bodies, beauty to our eyes, music to our ears, honey to our mouths,
perfume to our nostrils, light to our understandings, contentment to
our wills, and delight to our hearts. And what can be lacking, where
God himself will be the soul of our souls? Yea, all the strength, wit,
pleasures, virtues, colours, beauties, harmony, and goodness, that are
in men, beasts, fishes, fowls, trees, herbs, and all creatures, are
nothing but sparkles of those things which are in infinita perfection
in God. And in him we shall enjoy them in a far more perfect and
blessed manner. He himself will then supply their use: nay, the best
creatures which serve us now shall not have the honour to serve us
then. There will be no need of the sun nor of the moon to shine in that
city; for the glory of God doth light it (Rev. xxi. 23.) No more will
there be any need or use of any creature, when we shall enjoy the
Creator himself.

When, therefore., we behold anything that is excellent in any
creatures, let us say to ourselves, How much more excellent is he who
gave them this excellency! When we behold the wisdom of men, who
overrule creatures stronger than themselves; outrun the sun and moon in
discourse, prescribing many years before in what courses they shall be
eclipsed; let us say to ourselves, How admirable is the wisdom of God,
who made men so wise! When we consider the strength of whales and
elephants, the tempest of winds, and terror of thunder, let us say to
ourselves, How strong, how mighty, how terrible is that God, that makes
these mighty and fearful creatures! When we taste things that are
delicately sweet, let us say to ourselves, O how sweet is that God from
whom all these creatures have received their sweetness! When we behold
the admirable colours which are in flowers and birds, and all the
lovely beauty of nature, let us say, How fair is that God that made
these so fair!

And if our loving God hath thus provided us so many excellent delights,
for our passage through this Bochim (Judg. ii. 5), or valley of tears,
what are those pleasures which he hath prepared for us, when we shall
enter into the palace of our Master's joy! How shall our souls be there
ravished with the love of so lovely a God! So glorious is the object of
heavenly saints: so amiable is the sight of our gracious Saviour.

### Of the Prerogatives which the Elect shall enjoy in Heaven.

By reason of this communion with God, the elect in heaven shall have
four superexcellent prerogatives:--

1. They shall have the kingdom of heaven for their inheritance (Matt.
xxv.; 1 Pet. i. 4), and they shall be free denizens of the heavenly
Jerusalem (Eph. ii. 19; Heb. xii. 22.) St. Paul, by being a free
citizen of Rome (Acts xxi. 26), escaped whipping; but they who are once
free citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, shall ever be freed from the
whips of eternal torments. For this freedom was bought for us, not with
a great sum of money (Acts xxii. 28), but with the precious blood of
the Son of God (1 Pet. i. 18.)

2. They shall all be kings and priests (Rev. v. 10; 1 Pet. ii. 9; Rom.
xvi. 10:) spiritual kings, to reign with Christ, and to triumph over
Satan and the world; and spiritual priests, to offer to God the
spiritual sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving for evermore (1 Pet. ii.
5; Heb. xiii. 15.) And therefore they are said to wear both crowns and
robes. O what a comfort is this to poor parents that have many
children! If they breed them up in the fear of God, and to be true
Christians, then are they parents to so many kings and priests.

3. Their bodies shall shine as the brightness of the sun in the
firmament, like the glorious body of Christ (Matt. xiii. 43), which
shined brighter than the sun at noon, when it appeared to Paul (Phil.
iii. 21; Acts xii. 6.) A glimpse of which glorious brightness appeared
in the bodies of Moses and Elias, transfigured with our Lord in the
holy mount (Luke ix. 30; Mark ix. 5.) Therefore, saith the apostle, it
shall rise a glorious body; yea, a spiritual body, not in substance,
but in quality (1 Cor. xv. 43, 44:) preserved by spiritual means, and
having (as an angel) agility to ascend or descend. O what an honour is
it, that our bodies (falling more vile than carrion) should thus arise
in glory, like unto the body of the Son of God! (1 Thess. iv. 1.)

4. Lastly, They (together with all the holy angels) there keep, without
any labour to distract them, a perpetual Sabbath, to the glory, honour,
and praise of God, for the creating, redeeming, and sanctifying the
church; and for his power, wisdom, justice, mercy, and goodness, in the
government of heaven and earth. When thou hearest a sweet concert of
music, meditate how happy thou shalt be, when, with the quire of
heavenly angels and saints, thou shalt sing a part in that spiritual
Allelujah, in that eternal blessed Sabbath, where there shall be such
variety of pleasures, and satiety of joys, as neither know tediousness
in doing, nor end in delighting.

### Of the Effects of those Prerogatives.

From these prerogatives there will arise to the elect in heaven, five
notable effects:--

1. They shall know God with a perfect knowledge (1 Cor. i. 10), so far
as creatures can possibly comprehend the Creator. For there we shall
see the Word, the Creator; and in the Word, all creatures that by the
Word were created; so that we shall not need to learn (of the things
which were made) the knowledge of him by whom all things were made. The
most excellent creatures in this life, are but as a dark veil (1 Cor.
xxiii. 12; 2 Cor. iii. 16) drawn between God and us; but when this veil
shall be drawn aside, then shall we see God face to face, and know him
as we are known. We shall know the power of the, Father, the wisdom of
the Son, the grace of the Holy Ghost, and the indivisible nature of the
blessed Trinity. And in him we shall know, not only all our friends who
died in the faith of Christ, but also all the faithful that ever were,
or shall be. For,

(1.) Christ tells the Jews that they shall see Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and all the prophets, in the kingdom of God (Luke xiii. 28);
therefore we shall know them.

(2.) Adam in his innocency knew Eve to be bone of his bone, and flesh
of his flesh (Gen. ii. 23), as soon as he waked; much more then shall
we know our kindred, when we shall awake perfected and glorified in the
resurrection.

(3.) The apostles knew Christ after his resurrection, and the saints
which rose with him, and appeared in the holy city (Matt. xxvii. 53.)

(4.) Peter, James, and John, knew Moses and Elias in the
transfiguration (Matt. xvii. 4;) how much more shall we know one
another, when We shall be all glorified?

(5.) Dives knew Lazarus in Abraham's bosom (Luke xvi. 23;) much more
shall the elect know one another in heaven.

(6.) Christ saith that the twelve apostles shall sit upon twelve
thrones (Matt. xix. 28), to judge (at that day) the twelve tribes (1
Cor. vi. 2, 3;) therefore they shall be known, and consequently the
rest of the saints.

(7.) Paul saith, that at that day we shall know as we are known of God
(1 Cor. xiii. 11;) and Augustine out of this place comforteth a widow,
assuring her, that as in this life she saw her husband with external
eyes, so in the life to come she should know his heart, and what were
all his thoughts and imaginations. Then, husbands and wives, look to
your actions and thoughts; for all shall be made manifest one day (See
1 Cor. iv. 5.)

(8.) The faithful in the Old Testament, are said to be gathered to
their fathers (Gen. xxv. 35; 2 Kings xxii;) therefore the knowledge of
our friends remains.

(9.) Love never falleth away (1 Cor. xiii. 8); therefore knowledge, the
ground thereof, remains in another life.

(10.) Because the last day shall be a declaration of the just judgment
of God, when he shall reward every man according to his works (Rom. ii.
5; Rev. xxii. 12; Eccles. xii. 14; Rom. ii. 16;) and if every man's
work be brought to light, much more the worker. And if wicked men shall
account for every idle word (Matt. xii. 36), much more shall the idle
speakers themselves be known. And if the persons be not known, in vain
are the works made manifest. "Therefore," saith the apostle "every man
shall appear, to account for the work that he hath done in his body,"
&c., 1 Cor. v. 10. Though the respect of diversities of degrees and
callings in magistracy, ministry, and economy shall cease; yea, Christ
shall then cease to rule, as he is Mediator (I Cor. xv. 14, 28), and
rule all in all, as he is God equal with the Father and the Holy Ghost.

The greatest knowledge that men can attain to in this life (1 Cor.
xiii. 11) comes as far short of the knowledge which we shall have in
heaven, as the knowledge of a child that cannot yet speak plain, comes
of the knowledge of the greatest philosopher in the world. They who
thirst for knowledge, let them long to be students of this university.
For all the light by which we know anything in this world, is nothing
but the very shadow of God; [38] but when we shall know God in heaven,
we shall in him know the manner of the work of the creation, the
mysteries of the work of our redemption; yea, so much knowledge as a
creature can possibly conceive and comprehend of the Creator and his
works. But whilst we are in this life, we may say with Job, "How little
a portion hear we of him?" Job xxvi. 14.

2. They shall love God with as perfect and absolute a love as possibly
a creature can do. The manner of loving God, is to love him for himself
(1 Cor. xiii. 12); the measure is to love him without measure. For in
this life (knowing God but in part) we love him but in part; but when
the elect in heaven shall fully know God, then they will perfectly love
God: and for the infinite causes of love, which they shall know to be
in Him, they shall be infinitely ravished with the love of Him.

3. They shall be filled with all manner of divine pleasures. "At thy
right hand," saith David, "there are pleasures for evermore," Psal.
xvi. 11: "Yea, they shall drink," saith he, "out of the river of
pleasures," Psal. xxxvi. 8. For as soon as the soul is admitted into
the actual fruition of the beatifical essence of God, she hath all the
goodness, beauty, glory, and perfection of all creatures, in all the
world, united together, and at once presented to her in the sight of
God. If any delight in fairness, the fairest beauty is but a dusky
shadow to that. He that delights in pleasures shall there find infinite
varieties, without either interruption of grief, or distraction of
pain. He that loveth honour shall there enjoy it, without the disgrace
of cankered envy. He that loveth treasure shall there possess it, and
never be beguiled of it. There they shall have knowledge void of all
ignorance, health that no sickness shall impair, and life that no death
can determine. How happy, then, shall we be, when this life is changed,
and we translated thither!

4. They shall be replenished with an unspeakable joy. "In thy
presence," saith David, "is the fulness of joy." (Psal. xvi. 11.) And
this joy shall arise chiefly from the vision of God, and partly from
the sight of all the holy angels, and blessed souls of just and perfect
men, who are in bliss and glory with them; but especially from the
blissful sight of Jesus, the Mediator of the New Testament, our
Emmanuel, God made man. His sight will be the chief cause of our bliss
and joy. If the Israelites in Jerusalem so shouted for joy, that the
earth rang again, to see Solomon crowned, how shall the elect rejoice
in heaven, to see Christ, the true Solomon, adorned with glory! If John
Baptist, at his presence, did leap in his mother's womb for joy, how
shall we exult for joy, when he will be with us in heaven! If the wise
men rejoiced so greatly to find him a babe, lying in a manger, how
great shall the joy of the elect be, to see him sit, as a king, in his
celestial throne! If Simeon was glad to see him an infant, in the
temple, presented by the hands of the priest, how great shall our joy
be to see him a king, ruling all things, at the right hand of his
Father! If Joseph and Mary were so joyful to find him in the midst of
the doctors in the temple, how glad shall our souls be, to see him
sitting, as Lord, among angels in heaven! This is that joy of our
Master, which, as the apostle saith, "the eye hath not seen, the ear
hath not heard, nor the heart of man can conceive." (1 Cor. ii. 5;
Matt. xxv. 21;) which, because it cannot enter into us, we shall enter
into it.

5. Lastly, They shall enjoy this blissful and glorious state for
evermore: therefore it is termed everlastings life (John xvii. 3.) And
Christ saith, that our joy shall no man take from us. All other joys,
be they never so great, have an end. Ahasuerus's feast lasted an
hundred and eighty days (Esth. i. 3): but he, and it, and all his joys
are gone. For mortal man to be assumed to heavenly glory, to be
associated to angels, to be satiated with all delights and joys, but
for a time, were much: but to enjoy them for ever, without intermission
or end, who can hear it, and not admire? All the saints of Christ, as
soon as they felt once but a true taste of these eternal joys, counted
all the riches and pleasures of this life to be but loss and dung, in
respect of that (Phil. iii. 8.) And therefore, with incessant prayers,
fasting, alms-deeds, tears, faith, and good life, they laboured to
ascertain themselves of this eternal life; and for the love of it, they
willingly either sold or parted with all their earthly goods and
possessions (Acts ii. 45.)

Christ calleth Christians merchants (Luke xix.), and eternal life a
precious pearl, which a wise merchant will purchase, though it cost him
all that he hath (Matt. xiii.)

Alexander hearing the report of the great riches of the eastern
country, divided forthwith among his captains and soldiers all his
kingdom of Macedonia. Hephæstion asking him, What he meant in so doing?
Alexander answered, That he preferred the riches of India (whereof he
hoped shortly to be master) before all that his father Philip had left
him in Macedonia. And should not Christians, then, prefer the eternal
riches of heaven, so greatly renowned (which they shall enjoy ere
long), before the corruptible things of this world, which last but for
a season?

Abraham and Sarah left their own country and possessions, to look for a
city whose builder and maker is God (Heb. xi. 10, 15, 16;) and
therefore bought no land but only a place of burial. David preferred
one day in this place before a thousand elsewhere; yea, to be a
door-keeper in the house of God, rather than to dwell in the richest
tabernacles of wickedness (Psal. lxxxiv. 10.) Elias earnestly besought
the Lord to receive his soul into his kingdom (1 Kings xix. 4), and
went willingly, though in a fiery chariot, thither (2 Kings ii. 11.)
St. Paul, having once seen heaven, continually desired to be dissolved,
that he might be with Christ (Phil. i. 23.) Peter, having espied but a
glimpse of that eternal glory in the Mount, wished that he might dwell
there all the days of his life, saying, "Master, it is good for us to
be here." (Matt. xvii. 4.) How much better does Peter now think it to
be in heaven itself! Christ, a little before his death, prayeth his
Father to receive him into that excellent glory (John xvii. 5.) And the
apostle witnesseth, that "for the joy that was set before him, he
endured the cross, and despised the shame." Heb. xi. 2. If a man did
but once see those joys (if it were possible), he would endure an
hundred deaths to enjoy that happiness but one day.

Augustine saith, that he would be content to endure the torments of
hell to gain this joy, rather than to lose it. Ignatius, Paul's
scholar, being threatened, as he was going to suffer, with the cruelty
of torments, answered, with great courage of faith, "Fire, gallows,
beasts, breaking of my bones, quartering of my members, crushing of my
body, all the torments of the devil together, let them come upon me, so
I may enjoy my Lord Jesus, and his kingdom." The like constancy shewed
Polycarp, who could not by any terrors of any kind of death, be moved
to deny Christ in the least measure. With the like resolution Basil
answered his persecutors, when they would terrify him with death: "I
will never," said he, "fear death, which can do no more than restore me
to him that made me." If Ruth left her own country, and followed Naomi,
her mother-in-law, to go and dwell with her in the land of Canaan
(which was but a type of heaven), only upon the fame which she heard of
the God of Israel (though she had no promise of any portion in it), how
shouldst thou follow Christ into the heavenly Canaan, where God has
given thee an eternal inheritance, assured by an holy covenant, made in
the word of God, signed with the blood of his Son, and sealed with his
Spirit and sacraments! This shall be thine eternal happiness in the
kingdom of heaven, where thy life shall be a communion with the blessed
Trinity; thy joy, the presence of the Lamb; thy exercise, singing; thy
song, hallelujah; thy consorts, saints and angels: where youth
flourishes, that never waxeth old; beauty lasts, that never fadeth;
love abounds, that never cooleth; health continues, that never
slacketh; and life remains, that never endeth.

[38] Lumen est umbra Dei, et Deus est lumen luminis. Plato, Pol. 6.

### Meditations directing a Christian how to apply to himself, without delay, the foresaid knowledge of God and himself.

Thou seest, therefore, O man, how wretched and cursed thy state is, by
corruption of nature, without Christ! insomuch, that as the scriptures
liken wicked men to lions, bears, bulls, horses, dogs, and such like
savage creatures, in their lives, it is certain that the condition of
an unregenerate man is in his death more vile than a dog, or the
filthiest creature in the world. For the beast, being made but for
man's use, when he dies, ends all his miseries with his death; but man,
endued with a reasonable and an immortal soul, made after God's image,
to serve God, when he ends the miseries of this life, must account for
all his misdeeds, and begin to endure those miseries that never shall
know end. No creature but man is liable to yield at his death an
account for his life. The brute creatures, not having reason, shall not
be required to make any account for their deeds: and good angels,
though they have reason, yet shall they yield no account, because they
have no sin. And as for evil angels, they are without all hope already
condemned, so that they need not make any further accounts: man only in
his death must be God's accountant for his life.

On the other side thou seest, O man, how happy and blessed thy estate
is, being truly reconciled to God in Christ; in that, through the
restoration of God's image, and thy restitution into thy sovereignty
over other creatures, thou art in this life little inferior to the
angels, and shalt be in the life to come equal to the angels: yea, in
respect of thy nature, exalted by a personal union to the Son of God,
and by him to the glory of the Trinity, superior to the angels, a
fellow-brother with angels in spiritual grace and everlasting glory.

Thou hast seen how glorious and perfect God is, and how that all thy
chief bliss and happiness consists in having an eternal communion with
him.

Now, therefore, O impenitent sinner! in the bowels of Christ Jesus I
entreat thee, nay, I conjure thee, as thou tenderest thine own
salvation, seriously to consider with me, how false, how vain, how
vile, are those things which still retain and chain thee in this
wretched and cursed estate wherein thou livest, and which hinder thee
from the favour of God, and the hope of eternal life and happiness.

<p>
  <a class="prev" href="02.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="04.html">Next</a>
</p>
