## How a Private Man Must Begin the Morning With Piety.

As soon as ever thou awakest in the morning, keep the door of thy heart
fast shut, that no earthly thought may enter, before that God come in
first; and let him, before all others, have the first place there. So
all evil thoughts either will not dare to come in, or shall the easier
be kept out; and the heart will more savour of piety and godliness all
the day after; but if thy heart be not, at thy first waking, filled
with some meditations of God and his word, and dressed, like the lamp
in the tabernacle (Exod. xxvii. 20, 21), every morning and evening,
with the oil-olive of God's word, and perfumed with the sweet incense
of prayer (Exod. xxx. 6, 7), Satan will attempt to fill it with worldly
cares or fleshly desires, so that it will grow unfit for the service of
God all the day after, sending forth nothing but the stench of corrupt
and lying words, and of rash and blasphemous thoughts.

Begin, therefore, every day's work with God's word and prayer; and
offer up to God upon the altar of a contrite heart, the groans of thy
spirit, and the calves of thy lips, as thy morning sacrifice, and the
first fruits of the day (Psal. li. 17; Rom. viii. 22; Hos. xiii. 2;
Psal. cxxx. 6;) and as soon as thou awakest say to him thus:

My soul waiteth on thee, O Lord, more than the morning watch watcheth
for the morning! O God, therefore be merciful unto me, and bless me,
and cause thy face to shine upon me! Fill me with thy mercy this
morning, so shall I rejoice and be glad all my days.

### Meditations for the Morning.

1. Almighty God can, in the resurrection, as easily raise up thy body
out of the grave, from the sleep of death, as he hath this morning
wakened thee in thy bed, out of the sleep of nature. At the dawning of
which resurrection day, Christ shall come to be glorified in his
saints; and every one of the bodies of the thousands of his saints,
being fashioned like unto his glorious body, shall shine as bright as
the sun (2 Thess. i. 10; Jude, ver. 14; Phil. iii. 21; Luke ix. 31;)
all the angels shining likewise in their glory; the body of Christ
surpassing them all in splendour and glory; and the Godhead excelling
it. If the rising of one sun make the morning sky so glorious, what a
bright shining and glorious morning will that be, when so many thousand
thousands of bodies, far brighter than the sun, shall appear and
accompany Christ as his glorious train, coming to keep his general
session of righteousness, and to judge the wicked angels, and all
ungodly men (Acts xvii. 31; 1 Cor. vi. 3; Jude, ver. 15;) and let not
any transitory profit, pleasure, or vain glory of this day, cause thee
to lose thy part and portion of the eternal bliss and glory of that
day, which is properly termed the resurrection of the just (Luke xiv.
14.) Beasts have bodily eyes to see the ordinary light of the day: but
endeavour thou with the eyes of faith, to foresee the glorious light of
that day.

2. Thou knowest not how near, the evil spirit which night and day, like
a roaring lion, walketh about seeking to devour thee (1 Pet. v. 8; Job
i. 7) was to thee while thou wast asleep and not able to help thyself;
and thou knowest not what mischief he would have done to thee, had not
God hedged thee and thine with his ever-waking Providence, and guarded
thee with his holy and blessed angels (Job i. 10; Psal. cxxi. 4; Psalm
34:7; Gen. xxxii. 1, 2; 2 Kings vi. 16.)

3. If thou hearest the cock crow, remember Peter, to imitate him (Luke
xxii. 61, 62;) and call to mind that cock-crowing sound of the last
trumpet, which shall waken thee from the dead. And consider in what
case thou wert, if it sounded now, and become such as thou wouldst then
wish to be; lest at that day thou shouldst wish that thou hadst never
seen this; yea, curse the day of thy natural birth, for want of being
new-born by spiritual grace (Jer. xx. 14; Job iii. 1; Tit. iii. 5.)
When the cock crows the thief despairs of his hope, and gives over his
night's enterprise: so the devil ceases to tempt, or attempt any
further, when he hears the devout soul wakening herself with morning
prayer.

4. Remember that Almighty God is about thy bed, and seeth thy
down-lying, and thy up-rising; under-standeth thy thoughts, and is
acquainted with all thy ways (Psal. cxxxix. 2, 3.) Remember likewise
that his holy angels, who guarded and watched over thee all night, do
also behold how thou wakest and risest (Gen. xxxi. 55; xxxii. 1, 2.) Do
all things, therefore, as in the awful presence of God, and in the
sight of his holy angels (Psal. xci. 5, 11; Acts xii. 11.)

5. As thou art putting on thine apparel, remember that they were first
given as coverings of shame, being the effects of sin; and that they
are made but of the offals of dead beasts. Therefore, whether thou
respect the stuff, or the first institution, thou hast so little cause
to be proud of them, that thou hast great cause to be humbled at the
sight and wearing of them, seeing the richest apparel are but fine
covers of shame. Meditate rather, that as thine apparel serves to cover
thy shame, and to fence thy body from cold, so thou shouldst be as
careful to cover thy soul with that wedding garment which is the
righteousness of Christ (because apprehended by our faith), called the
righteousness of the saints (Matt. xxii. 11; Rom. xiii. 14; 1 Cor. i.
30; Philippians 3:9; Revelation 19:8; Ephesians 4:24;) lest, while we
are richly apparelled in the sight of men, we be not found to walk
naked (so that all our filthiness be seen) in the sight of God (Rev.
xvi. 15.) But that with his righteousness, as with a robe, we may cover
ourselves from perpetual shame; and shield our souls from that fiery
cold that will procure eternal weeping, and gnashing of teeth (Matt.
xxii. 13.) And withal consider how blessed a people were our nation, if
every silken suit did cover a sanctified soul. And yet a man would
think, that on whom God bestowed most of these outward blessings, of
them he should receive greatest inward thanks (Luke xii. 48.) But if it
prove otherwise, their reckoning will prove the heavier in the day of
their accounts.

6. Consider how God's mercy is renewed unto thee every morning, in
giving thee, as it were, a new life Lam. iii. 23; Psal. xix. 5), and in
causing the sun, after his incessant race, to rise again to give thee
light. Let not, then, this glorious light burn in vain; but prevent
rather (as oft as thou canst) the sun rising to give God thanks (Luke
xii. 48;) and kneeling down at thy bedside, salute him at the
day-spring with some devout antelucanum or morning soliloquy:
containing an humble confession of thy sins, seeking the pardon of all
thy faults, a thanksgiving for all his benefits, and a craving of his
gracious protection to his church, thyself, and all that belong to
thee.
