## Brief Directions How to Read The Holy Scriptures Once Every Year Over, With Ease, Profit, and Reverence.

But forasmuch, that as faith is the soul, so reading and meditating on
the word of God, are the parent's of prayer, therefore, before thou
prayest in the morning, first read a chapter in the word of God; then
meditate awhile with thyself, how many excellent things thou canst
remember out of it.

As--First, what good counsels or exhortations to good works and to holy
life.

Secondly, what threatenings of judgments against such and such a sin;
and what fearful examples of God's punishment or vengeance upon such
and such sinners.

Thirdly, what blessings God promiseth to patience, chastity, mercy,
alms-deeds, zeal in his service, charity, faith and trust in God, and
such like Christian virtues.

Fourthly, what gracious deliverance God hath wrought, and what special
blessings he hath bestowed upon them who were his true and zealous
servants.

Fifthly, apply these things to thine own heart, and read not these
chapters as matter of historical discourse, but as if they were so many
letters or epistles sent down from God out of heaven to thee; for
whatsoever is written, is written for our learning (Rom. xv. 4.)

Sixthly, read them, therefore, with that reverence as if God himself
stood by, and spake these words to thee, to excite thee to those
virtues, to dissuade thee from those vices: assuring thyself that if
such sins (as thou readest there) be found in thee, without repentance,
the like plagues will fall upon thee; but if thou dost practise the
like piety and virtuous deeds, the like blessings shall come to thee
and thine.

In a word; apply all that thou readest in holy Scripture, to one of
these two heads chiefly; either to confirm thy faith, or to increase
thy repentance: for, as sustine et abstine, bear and forbear, was the
epitome of a good philosopher's life; [42] so crede et resipisce,
believe and repent, is the whole sum of a true Christian's profession,
One chapter thus read with understanding, and meditated with
application, will better feed and comfort thy soul than five read and
run over without marking their scope or sense, or making any use of
them to thine ownself. If in this manner thou shalt read three chapters
every day--one in the morning, another at noon, and the third at night
(reading so many psalms instead of a chapter), thou shall read overall
the canonical scriptures in a year, except six chapters, which thou
mayest add to the duties of the last day of the year. [43] The reading
of the Bible in order, will help thee better to understand both the
history and scope of the holy Scripture. And as for the Apocrypha,
being but penned by man's spirit, thou mayest read them at thy
pleasure; but believe, them so far only as they agree with the
canonical Scripture, which is edited by the Holy Ghost.

But it may be thou wilt say, that thy business will not permit thee so
much time, as to read every morning a chapter, &c. O man, remember that
thy life is but short, and that all this business is but for the use of
this short life; but salvation or damnation is everlasting! Rise up,
therefore, every morning by so much time the earlier: defraud thy foggy
flesh of so much sleep; but rob not thy soul of her food, nor God of
his service; and serve the Almighty duly whilst thou hast time and
health.

Having thus read thy chapter, as thou art about to pray, remember that
God is a God of holiness (Exod. xxvi. 36;) whereof he warns us by
repeating so often, "Be ye holy, for I am holy." (Levit. xxi. 44; xix.
2; xx. 7.) And when he devoured with a sudden fire Nadab and Abihu, for
offering to him incense with strange fire (Lev. x. 2),--like these now
a-days, who offer prayers from hearts fraught with the fire of lust and
malice,--would give no other reason of his judgment but this, "I will
be sanctified in them that come near me." (Lev. x. 3.) As if he should
have said, If I cannot be sanctified by them who are my servants, in
serving me with that holiness that they should, I will be sanctified on
them, by confounding them with my just judgments, which their lewdness
deserves. God cannot abide any wilful uncleanness or sin in them who
serve him: "For the Lord thy God walketh in the midst of thy camp to
deliver thee, and to give thee thine enemies before thee: therefore the
host shall be holy." (Deut. xxiii. 13, 4.)

Zophar in Job saith, "If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out
thine hand towards God to pray; if iniquity be in thy hand, put it far
away, and let no wickedness dwell in thy tabernacle." (Job xi. 13, 14.)
For, as Esai saith, "If there be any uncleanness in our hands" (that
is, any sin whereof we have not repented) "though we stretch out our
hands unto him, and. make many prayers, the Lord will hide his eyes
from us, and will not hear our prayers." (Isai. i. 15.) Therefore,
before thou prayest, let God see that thy heart is sorrowful for thy
sin, and that thy mind is resolved (through the assistance of his
grace) to amend thy faults. And then, having washed thyself, and
adorned thy body with apparel which beseemeth thy calling, and the
image of God, which thou bearest, shut thy chamber-door, and kneel down
at thy bedside, or some other convenient place; and in reverent manner
lifting up thy heart, together with thy hands and eyes, as in the
presence of God who seeth the inward intention of thy soul, offer up to
God from the altar of a contrite heart, thy prayer, as a morning
sacrifice, through the mediation of Christ, in these or the like
words:--

[42] Epicteti dict.

[43] In the canonical books of the Old Testament there are 931
chapters: but distributing the 150 Psalms into 60 parts, thou shalt
find but 841; which being added to 260, the number of the chapters in
the New Testament, will amount to 1101; dividing which by three into
365, the number of the days of the year, there will remain but six,
which thou mayest dispose of as is prescribed.
