## A Prayer for the Morning.

O most mighty and glorious God! full of incomprehensible power and
majesty; whose glory the very heaven of heavens is not able to contain!
Look down from heaven upon me, thine unworthy servant, who here
prostrate myself at the footstool of thy throne of grace. But look upon
me, O Father, through the merits and mediation of Jesus Christ, thy
beloved Son, in whom only thou art well pleased! For of myself, I am
not worthy to stand in thy presence, or to speak with mine unclean lips
to so holy a God as thou art. For thou knowest that in sin I was
conceived and born, and that I have lived ever since in iniquity: so
that I have broken all thy holy commandments by sinful motions, unclean
thoughts, evil words, and wicked works; omitting many of those duties
which thou requirest for thy service, and committing many of those
vices which thou, under the penalty of thy displeasure, hast forbidden.

[Here thou mayest confess to God thy secret sins, which do most burthen
thy conscience, saying, But more especially, O Lord, I do here with
grief of heart confess unto thee, &c.]

And for these my sins, O Lord, I stand here guilty of thy curse, with
all the miseries of this life, and everlasting torments in hell-fire,
when this wretched life is ended, if thou shouldst deal with me
according to my deserts. Yea, Lord, I confess, that it is thy mercy
which endureth for ever, and thy compassion which never fails, that is
the cause that I have not been long ago consumed. But with thee, O
Lord, there is mercy, and plenteous redemption. In the multitude,
therefore, of thy mercy, and confidence in Christ's merits, I entreat
thy divine Majesty that thou wouldst not enter into judgment with thy
servant, neither be extreme to mark what I have hitherto done amiss:
for if thou dost, then no flesh can be justified in thy sight, nor any
living stand in thy presence. But be thou merciful unto me, and wash
away all the uncleanness of my sin, with the merits of that precious
blood which Jesus Christ hath shed for me. And seeing that he hath
borne the burthen of that curse which was due to my transgressions, O
Lord deliver me from my sins, and from all those judgments which hang
over my head, as due unto me for them, and separate them as far from
thy presence as the east is from the west! bury them in the burial of
Christ, that they may never have power to rise up against me, to shame
me in this life, or to condemn me in the world which is to come. And I
beseech thee, O Lord, not only to wash away my sins with the blood of
thine immaculate Lamb, but also to purge my heart, by thy Holy Spirit,
from the dross of my natural corruption; that I may feel thy Spirit
more and more killing my sin, in the power and practice thereof, so
that this day I may with more freedom of mind and liberty of will serve
thee, the everlasting God, in righteousness and holiness. And give me
grace, that by the direction and assistance of the same Holy Spirit, I
may persevere to be thy faithful and unfeigned servant to my life's
end; that when this mortal life is ended, I may be made a partaker of
immortality and everlasting happiness in thy heavenly kingdom. In the
meantime, O Lord, whilst it is thy blessed will and pleasure that I may
continue" to spend and end that small number and remnant of days which
thou hast appointed for me to live in this vale of misery, teach me so
to number my days that I may apply my heart unto wisdom: and as thou
dost add days unto my life, so, good Lord, I beseech thee, add
repentance and amendment to my days, that as I grow in years, so I may
increase in grace and favour with thee and all thy people. And to this
end, give unto me a supply of all those graces which thou knowest to be
wanting in me, and necessary for me, with an increase of all those good
gifts wherewith thou hast already endowed me; that so I may be the
better enabled to lead such a godly life, and honest conversation, as
that thy name may thereby be glorified, others may take good example by
me, and my soul may more cheerfully feed on the peace of a good
conscience, and be more replenished with the joy of the Holy Ghost. And
here, O Lord, according to my bounden duty, I give thee most humble and
hearty thanks for all those blessings which of thy goodness thou hast
bestowed upon me. And namely, for that thou hast of thy free love,
according to thine eternal purpose, elected me, before the foundation
of the world was laid, unto salvation in Jesus Christ;--for that thou
hast created me after thine own image, and hast begun to restore that
in me which was lost in our first parents;--for that thou hast
effectually called me, by the working of thy Spirit, in the preaching
of the gospel, and the receiving of the sacraments, to the knowledge of
thy saving grace, and obedience to thy blessed will;--for that thou
hast bought and redeemed me, with the blood of thine only-begotten Son,
from the torments of hell, and thrall of Satan;--for that thou hast, by
faith in Christ, freely justified me, who am by nature the child of
wrath;--for that thou hast in good measure sanctified me by thy Holy
Spirit, and given me so large a time to repent, together with the means
of repentance. I thank thee likewise, good Lord, for my life, health,
wealth, food, raiment, peace, prosperity, and plenty; and for that thou
hast preserved me this night from all perils and dangers of body and
soul, and hast brought me safe to the beginning of this day. And as
thou hast now wakened my body from sleep, so, I beseech thee, waken my
soul from sin, and carnal security; and as thou hast caused the light
of the day to shine in my bodily eyes, so, good Lord, cause the light
of thy Word and Holy Spirit to illuminate my heart; and give me grace,
as one of thy children of light, to walk in all holy obedience before
thy face this day; and that I may endeavour to keep faith and a clear
conscience towards thee, and towards all men, in all my thoughts,
words, and dealings. And so, good Lord, bless all my studies and
actions which I shall take in hand this day, as that they may tend to
thy glory, the good of others, and the comfort of my own soul and
conscience in that day when I shall make my final account to thee. O my
God, keep thy servant, that I do no evil to any man this day; and let
it be thy blessed will not to suffer the devil nor his wicked angels,
nor any of his evil members, or my malicious enemies, to have any power
to do me hurt or violence. But let the eye of thy holy Providence watch
over me for good and not for evil; and command thy holy angels to pitch
their tents round about me, for my defence and safety in my going out
and coming in, as thou hast promised they should do about them that
fear thy name. Into thy hands, O Father, I do here commend my soul and
body, my actions, and all that ever I have, to be guided, defended, and
protected by thee; being assured, that whatsoever thou takest into thy
custody cannot perish, nor suffer any hurt or harm. And if I at any
time this day shall through frailty forget thee, yet, Lord, I beseech
thee, do thou in mercy remember me. And I pray not unto thee, O Father,
for myself alone; but I beseech thee also be merciful unto thy whole
church, and chosen people, wheresoever they live upon the face of the
earth. Defend them from the rage and tyranny of the devil, the world,
and antichrist. Give thy gospel a free and a joyful passage through the
world, for the conversion of those who belong to thine election and
kingdom.

Bless the churches and kingdoms wherein we live with the continuance of
peace, justice, and true religion. Bless our sovereign the Queen, and
all the royal family, Increase in them all heroical gifts and spiritual
graces which may make them fit for those places for which thou hast
ordained them. Direct all the nobility, ministers, and magistrates of
this church and commonwealth, to govern the people in true religion,
justice, obedience, and tranquillity. Be merciful unto all the brethren
which fear thee, and call upon thy name. And comfort as many among them
as are sick and comfortless in body or mind; especially be favourable
to all such as suffer any trouble or persecution for the testimony of
thy truth, and holy gospel; and give them a gracious deliverance out of
all their troubles, which way it shall seem best to thy wisdom, for the
glory of thy name, the further enlarging of the truth, and the more
ample increase of their own comfort and consolation. Hasten thy coming,
O blessed Saviour, and end these sinful days; and give me grace, that
like a wise virgin I maybe prepared with oil in my lamp to meet thee,
the blessed bridegroom, at thy coming, whether it be by the day of
death, or of judgment; and then, Lord Jesus, come when thou wilt, even
Lord Jesus come quickly. These, and all other graces which thou knowest
needful and necessary for me, this day and evermore, I humbly beg and
crave at thy hands, O Father, giving thee thy glory, in that form of
prayer, which Christ himself hath taught me to say unto thee:

"Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name," &c.

## Meditations to stir us up to Morning Prayer.

1. If, when thou art about to pray, Satan shall suggest that thy
prayers are too long, and that therefore it were better either to omit
prayers, or else to cut them shorter, meditate that prayer is thy
spiritual sacrifice, wherewith God is well pleased (Heb. xiii. 15, 16;)
and therefore it is so displeasing to the devil, and so irksome to the
flesh. Bend therefore thy affections (will they, nill they) to so holy
an exercise; assuring thyself, that it doth by so much the more please
God, by how much the more it is unpleasing to thy flesh.

2. Forget not that the Holy Ghost puts it down as a special note of
reprobates, "They call not upon the Lord, they call not upon God."
(Psal. xiv. 4; liii. 4.) And when Eliphaz supposed that Job had cast
off the fear of God, and that God had cast Job out of his favour, he
chargeth him that he restrained prayer before God (Job xv. 4;) making
that a sure note of the one, and a sufficient cause of the other. On
the other side, that God has promised that "whosoever shall call on his
name shall be saved." (Rom. x. 13.) It is certain that he who makes no
conscience of the duty of prayer, has no grace of the Holy Spirit in
him, for the spirit of grace and of prayer are one (Zech. xii. 10:) and
therefore grace and prayer go together. But he that can from a penitent
heart morning and evening pray to God, it is sure that he has his
measure of grace in this world, and he shall have his portion of glory
in the life which is to come.

3. Remember, that as loathing of meat, and painfulness of speaking, are
two symptoms of a sick body; so irksomeness of praying when thou
talkest with God, and carelessness in hearing, when God, by his word,
speaks unto thee, are two sure signs of a sick soul.

4. Call to mind the zealous devotions of the Christians in the
primitive church, who spent many whole nights and vigils in watching
and praying for the forgiveness of their sins, and that they might be
found ready at the coming of Christ; and that David was not content to
pray at morning, at evening, and at noon (Psal. lv. 16, 17), but he
would also rise up at midnight to pray unto God (Psal. cxix. 62.) And
if Christ did chide his disciples, because they would not watch with
him one hour in praying {Matt. xxvi. 40), what chiding dost thou
deserve, who thinkest it too long to continue in prayer but one quarter
of an hour? If thou hast spent divers hours at a vain ball or play; yea
whole days and nights in carding and dicing, to please thy flesh, be
ashamed to think that praying for a quarter of an hour is too long an
exercise for the service of God.

5. Consider, that if the papists, in their blind superstition, do in an
unknown, and therefore unedifying tongue, fit only for the children of
mystical Babylon (1 Cor. xiv. 14; Gen. xi. 79; Rev. xvii. 5), mutter
over upon their beads every morning and evening so many scores of
ave-maries, paternosters, and idolatrous prayers, how shall they, in
their superstitious devotion, rise up in judgment against thee,
professing thyself to be a true worshipper of Christ? If that thou
thinkest these prayers too long a task, being shorter for quantity than
theirs, but far more profitable for quality, tending only to God's
glory, and thy good; and so compiled of Scripture phrase, as that thou
mayest speak to God, as well in his own holy words, as in thine own
native language: be ashamed that papists, in their superstitious
worshipping of creatures, should show themselves more devout than thou
in the sincere worshipping of the true and only God (John xvii. 3.) And
indeed a prayer in private devotion should be one continued speech,
rather than many broken fragments.

6. Lastly, when such thoughts come into thy head, either to keep thee
from prayer, or to distract thee in praying, remember that those are
the fowls which the evil one sends to devour the good seed, and the
carcases of thy spiritual sacrifices; but endeavour with Abraham, to
drive them away (Gen. xv. 11.) Yet notwithstanding, if thou perceivest
at times, that thy spirits are dull, and thy mind not apt for prayer
and holy devotion, strive not too much for that time, but humbling
thyself at the sense of thine infirmity and dulness, knowing that God
accepteth the willing mind, though it be oppressed with the heaviness
of the flesh (Matt. xxvi. 41; 2 Cor. viii. 12), endeavour the next time
to recompense this dulness, by redoubling thy zeal, and for the time
present, commend thy soul to God in this, or the like short prayer:--

## Another short Morning Prayer.

O most gracious God, and merciful Father! I thine unworthy servant do
here acknowledge that as I have been born in sin, so I have lived in
iniquity, and broken every one of thy commandments, in thought, word,
and deed; following the desires of mine own will, and lusts of my
flesh, not caring to be governed by thy holy word and Spirit; and
therefore I have justly deserved all shame and misery in this life, and
everlasting condemnation in hell-fire, if thou shouldst but deal with
me according to thy justice, and my desert. Wherefore, O heavenly
Father, I beseech thee, for thy Son Jesus Christ's sake, and for the
merits of that bitter death and bloody passion which I believe that he
hath suffered for me, that thou wouldst pardon and forgive me all my
sins, and deliver me from the shame and vengeance which is due to me
for them. And send thy Holy Spirit into my heart, which may assure me
that thou art my Father, and that I am thy child, and that thou lovest
me with an unchangeable love; and let the same good Spirit lead me in
thy truth, and crucify in me more and more all worldly and carnal
lusts, that my sins may more and more die in me, and that I may serve
thee in unfeigned righteousness and holiness this day, and all the days
of my life; that when this mortal life is ended, I may, through thy
mercy in Christ, be made a partaker of everlasting glory in thy
heavenly kingdom. And here, O Lord, from the bottom of my heart, I
thank thee for all thy blessings, which thou hast bestowed upon my soul
and body; for electing me in thy love, redeeming me by thy Son,
sanctifying me by thy Spirit, and preserving me from my youth up, until
this present day and hour, by thy most gracious providence.

I thank thee more especially, for that thou hast defended me this night
from all perils and dangers, and hast brought me safe to the beginning
of this day. And now, good Lord, I beseech thee, keep me this day from
all evil that may hurt me, and from falling into any gross sin that
should offend thee. Set thy fear before my eyes, and let thy Spirit so
rule my heart, that all that I shall think, do, or speak this day, may
tend to thy glory, the good of others, and the peace of mine own
conscience. And to this end I commend myself, and all my ways and
actions, together with all that belong to me, unto thy gracious
direction and protection; praying thee to keep both them and me from
all evil, and to give a blessing to all our honest labours and
endeavours. Defend thy whole church from the tyranny of the world, and
of Antichrist. Preserve our Queen from all conspiracies and treasons:
grant her a long and prosperous reign over us. Bless the rest of the
royal family; endow them with thy grace, and defend them from all evil.
Bless all our ministers and magistrates with those graces and gifts
which thou knowest necessary for their places. Be favourable to all
that fear thee, and tremble at thy judgments. Comfort all those that
are sick and comfortless. Lord, keep me in a continual readiness, by
faith and repentance, for my last end, that whether I live or die, I
may be found thine own, to thine eternal glory, and mine everlasting
salvation, through Jesus Christ my only Saviour: In whose blessed name
I beg these mercies at thy hands, and give unto thee thy praise and
glory, in that prayer which he has sanctified with his own lips:--"Our
Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name," &c.

## Farther Meditations to stir up to Prayer in the Morning.

Think not any business or haste, though never so great, a sufficient
excuse to omit prayer in the morning: But meditate--

1. That the greater thy business is, by so much the more need thou hast
to pray for God's good speed and blessing upon it, seeing it is certain
that nothing can prosper without his blessing.

2. That many a man, when he thought himself surest, has been soonest
crossed; so mayest thou.

3. That many a man has gone out of his door, and never come in again:
many a man who rose well and lively in the morning, has been seen a
dead man ere night. [44] So may it befall thee: And if thou be so
careful, before thou goest abroad, to eat and drink, to fence thy body
from ill airs, how much more careful shouldst thou be to pray to
preserve thy soul from evil temptations?

4. That the time spent in prayer never hinders, but furthers and
prospers a man's journey and business.

5. That in going abroad into the world, thou goest into a forest full
of unknown dangers, where thou shalt meet many briers to tear thy good
name, many snares to trap thy life, and many hunters to devour thy
soul; it is a field of pleasant grass, but full of poisonous serpents:
adventure not, therefore, to go naked amongst these briers, till thou
hast prayed Christ to clothe thee with his righteousness; nor to pass
through these snares and ambushments, till thou hast prayed for God's
providence to be thy guide; nor to walk barefoot through this snaky
field, till having thy feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of
peace, thou hast prayed to have still the brazen serpent in the eyes of
thy faith; that so if thou comest not home holier, thou mayest be sure
not to return worse than when thou wentest out of thy door.

Therefore, though thy haste be never so much, or thy business never so
great, yet go not about it, nor out of thy doors, till thou hast at
least used this or the like short prayer:--

[44] Quem dies vidit veniens superbum: hunc dies videt fugiens
jacentem.--Senec. Nescis quid vesper serus vehat.--Varro.

## A brief Prayer for the Morning.

O merciful Father, for Jesus Christ's sake, I beseech thee forgive me
all my known and secret sins which in thought, word, or deed, I have
committed against thy Divine Majesty, and deliver me from all those
judgments which are due to me for them, and sanctify my heart with thy
Holy Spirit, that I may henceforth lead a more godly and religious
life! And here, O Lord, I praise thy holy name, for that thou hast
refreshed me this night with moderate sleep and rest; I beseech thee
likewise defend me this day from all perils and dangers of body and
soul: and to this end I commend myself and all my actions to thy
blessed protection and government, beseeching thee, that whether I live
or die, I may live and die to thy glory, and the salvation of my poor
soul, which thou hast bought with thy precious blood. Bless me,
therefore, O Lord, in my going out and coming in, and grant that
whatsoever I shall think, speak, or take in hand this day, may tend to
the glory of thy name, the good of others, and the comfort of mine own
conscience, when I shall come to make before thee my last account.
Grant this, O heavenly Father, for Jesus Christ thy Son's sake: in
whose blessed name I give thee thy glory, and beg at thy hands all
other graces which thou seest to be needful for me this day and ever,
in that prayer which Christ himself has taught me, "Our Father," &c.
