## A Prayer for the Evening.

O most gracious God and loving Father, who art about my bed and knowest
my down-lying and my uprising, and art near unto all that call upon
thee in truth and sincerity, I, wretched sinner, do beseech thee to
look upon me with the eyes of thy mercy, and not to behold me as I am
in myself; for then thou shalt see but an unclean and defiled creature,
conceived in sin, and living in iniquity, so that I am ashamed to lift
up mine eyes to heaven, knowing how grievously I have sinned against
heaven and before thee; for, O Lord, I have transgressed all thy
commandments and righteous laws, not only through negligence and
infirmity, but oftentimes through wilful presumption, contrary to my
knowledge; yea, contrary to the motions of thy Holy Spirit reclaiming
me from them: so that I have wounded my conscience, and grieved thy
Holy Spirit, by whom thou hast sealed me to the day of redemption. Thou
hast consecrated my soul and body to be the temples of the Holy Ghost;
I, wretched sinner, have defiled both with all manner of pollution and
uncleanness: my eyes, in taking pleasure to behold vanity; mine ears,
in hearing impure and unchaste speeches; my tongue, in leasing and evil
speaking; my hands are so full of impurity, that I am ashamed to lift
them up unto thee; and my feet have carried me after mine own ways; my
understanding and reasoning, which are so quick in all earthly matters,
are only blind and stupid when I come to meditate or discourse of
spiritual and heavenly things; my memory, which should be the treasury
of all goodness, is not so apt to remember anything, as those things
which are vile and vain; yea, Lord, by woful experience I find, that
naturally all the imaginations of the thoughts of my heart are only
evil continually; and my sins are more in number than the hairs which
grow upon mine head, and they have grown over me like a loathsome
leprosy, that from the crown of my head to the sole of my feet, there
remains no part which they have not infected; they make me seem vile in
mine own eyes--how much more abominable must I then appear in thy
sight! And the custom of sinning hath almost taken away the conscience
of sin, and brought upon me such dulness of sense and hardness of
heart, that thy judgments denounced against my sins by the faithful
preachers of thy word, do not terrify me to return unto thee by
unfeigned repentance for them; and if thou, Lord, shouldst but deal
with me according to thy justice and my desert, I should utterly be
confounded and condemned; but seeing that of thine infinite mercy thou
hast spared me so long, and still waitest for my repentance, I humbly
beseech thee, for the sake of the bitter death and bloody passion which
Jesus Christ hath suffered for me, that thou wouldst pardon and forgive
me all my sins and offences, and open unto me that ever-streaming
fountain of the blood of Christ, which thou hast promised to open under
the New Testament to the penitent of the house of David; that all my
sins and uncleanness may be so bathed in his blood, buried in his
death, and hid in his wounds, that they may never more be seen, to
shame me in this life, or to condemn me before thy judgment-seat in the
world which is to come. And forasmuch, O Lord, as thou knowest that it
is not in man to turn his own heart, unless thou dost first give him
grace to convert; and seeing that it is as easy with thee to make me
righteous and holy, as to bid me to be such, O my God, give me grace to
do what thou commandest, and then command what thou wilt, [47] and thou
shalt find me willing to do thy blessed will: and to this end give me
thy Holy Spirit, which thou hast promised to give, to the world's end,
to all thy elect people; and let the same Holy Spirit purge my heart,
heal my corruption, sanctify my nature, and consecrate my soul and
body, that they may become the temples of the Holy Ghost, to serve thee
in righteousness and holiness all the days of my life; that when, by
the direction and assistance of thy Holy Spirit, I shall finish my
course in this short and transitory life, I may cheerfully leave this
world, and resign my soul into thy fatherly hands, in the assured
confidence of enjoying everlasting life with thee in thine heavenly
kingdom, which thou hast prepared for thy elect saints, who love the
Lord Jesus and expect his appearing.

In the meanwhile, O Father, I beseech thee let thy Holy Spirit work in
me such a serious repentance, as that I may with tears lament my sins
past, with grief of heart be humbled for my sins present, and with all
my endeavour resist the like sins in time to come. And let the same
Holy Spirit likewise keep me in the unity of thy church, lead me in the
truth of thy word, and preserve me, that I never swerve from the same,
to Popery nor any error or false worship. And let thy Spirit open my
eyes more and more, to see the wondrous things of thy law: and open my
lips, that my mouth may daily defend thy truth, and set forth thy
praise. Increase in me those good gifts, which of thy mercy thou hast
already bestowed upon me, and give me a patient spirit, a chaste heart,
a contented mind, pure affections, wise behaviour, and all other graces
which thou seest to be necessary for me to govern my heart in thy fear,
and to guide all my life in thy favour; that whether I live or die, I
may live and die unto thee, who art my God and my Redeemer.

And here, O Lord, according as I am bound, I render unto thee from the
altar of my humblest heart, all possible thanks for all those blessings
and benefits which so graciously and plenteously thou hast bestowed
upon my soul and body, for this life, and for that which is to come;
namely, for my election, creation, redemption, vocation, justification,
sanctification, and preservation from my childhood until this present
day and hour; and for the firm hope which thou hast given me of my
glorification: likewise for my health, wealth, food, raiment, and
prosperity; and more especially, for that thou hast defended me this
day now past, from all perils and dangers both of body and soul,
furnishing me with all necessary good things that I stand in need of;
and as thou hast ordained the day for man to travel in, and the night
for him to take his rest, so, I beseech thee, sanctify unto me this
night's rest and sleep, that I may enjoy the same as thy sweet blessing
and benefit; that so this dull and wearied body of mine, being
refreshed with moderate sleep and rest, I may be the better enabled to
walk before thee, doing all such good works as thou hast appointed,
when it shall please thee by thy divine power to waken me the next
morning. And whilst I sleep, do thou, O Lord, who art the keeper of
Israel, that neither slumberest nor sleepest, watch over me in thy holy
providence, to protect me from all dangers, so that neither the evil
angels of Satan, nor any wicked enemy, may have any power to do me any
harm or evil; and to this end, give a charge unto thy holy angels, that
they, at thine appointment, may pitch their tents roundabout me, for my
defence and safety; as thou hast promised that they should do about
them that fear thy name. And knowing that thy name is a strong tower of
defence unto all those that trust therein, I here recommend myself, and
all that belong to me, unto thy holy protection and custody. If it be
thy blessed will to call for me in my sleep, O Lord, for Christ's sake,
have mercy upon me, and receive my soul into thy heavenly kingdom; and
if it be thy blessed pleasure to add more days to my life, O Lord, add
more amendment to my days, and wean my mind from the love of the world
and worldly vanities, and cause me more and more to settle my
conversation on heaven and heavenly things. And perfect daily in me,
that good work which thou hast begun, to the glory of thy name, and the
salvation of my sinful soul.

O Lord, I beseech thee likewise, save and defend from all evil and
danger, thy holy church, the Queen, and all the royal family; keep them
all in the sincerity of thy truth, and prosper them in all grace and
happiness. Bless the nobility, ministers, and magistrates of these
churches and kingdoms, each of them with those graces which are
expedient for their place and calling. And be thou, O Lord, a comfort
and consolation to all thy people whom thou hast thought meet to visit
with any kind of sickness, cross, or calamity. Hasten, O Father, the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Make me ever mindful of my last end,
and of the reckoning that I am then to make unto thee; and in the
meanwhile, careful so to follow Christ in the regeneration during this
life, as that with Christ I may have a portion in the resurrection of
the just, when this mortal life is ended. These graces, and all other
blessings, which thou, O Father, knowest to be requisite and necessary
for me, I humbly beg and crave at thy hands, in the name and mediation
of Jesus Christ thy Son, and in that form of prayer which he himself
hath taught me to say unto thee:--

"Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name," &c.

[47] Da Domine quod jubes, et jube quod vis.--Aug.

## Another shorter Evening Prayer.

O eternal God and heavenly Father, if I were not taught and assured by
the promises of thy gospel, and the examples of Peter, Mary Magdalene,
the publican, the prodigal child, and many other penitent sinners, that
thou art so full of compassion, and so ready to forgive the greatest
sinners, who are heaviest laden with sin, at what time soever they
return unto thee with penitent hearts, lamenting their sins, and
imploring thy grace, I should despair for mine own sins, and be utterly
discouraged from presuming to come into thy presence; considering the
hardness of my heart, the unruliness of my affections, and the
uncleanness of my conversation, by means of which I have transgressed
all thy laws, and deserved thy curse, which might cause my body to be
smitten with some fearful disease, my soul to languish with the death
of sin, my good name to be traduced with scandalous reproaches, and
make mine estate liable to all manner of crosses and casualties. And I
confess, Lord, that thy mercy is the cause that I have not been long
ago confounded. But, O my God, as thy mercy only staid thy judgment
from falling upon me hitherto, so I humbly beseech thee, in the bowels
of the mercy of Jesus Christ, in whom only thou art well pleased, that
thou wilt not deal with me according to my deserts, but that thou
wouldst freely and fully remit unto me all my sins and transgressions;
and that thou wouldst wash them clean from me, with the virtue of that
most precious blood, which thy Son Jesus Christ hath shed for me: for
he alone is the physician, and his blood only is the medicine that can
heal my sickness; and he is the true brazen serpent, that can cure that
poison wherewith the fiery serpents of my sins have stung and poisoned
my sick and wounded soul; and give me, I beseech thee, thine Holy
Spirit, which may assure me of mine adoption, and that may confirm my
faith, increase my repentance, enlighten my understanding, purify my
heart, rectify my will and affections, and so sanctify me throughout,
that my whole body, soul, and spirit may be kept unblameable until the
glorious coming of my Lord Jesus Christ. And now, O Lord, I give thee
hearty thanks and praise for that thou hast this day preserved me from
all harms and perils, notwithstanding all my sins and evil deserts; and
I beseech thee likewise, defend me this night from the roaring lion
which night and day seeketh to devour me. Watch thou, O Lord, over me
this night, to keep me from his temptations and tyranny, and let thy
mercy shield me from his unappeasable rage and malice; and to this end,
I commend myself into thy hands and protection: beseeching thee, O my
Lord and God, not to suffer Satan, nor any of his evil members, to have
power to do me any hurt or violence this night. And grant, good Lord,
that whether I sleep or wake, live or die, I may sleep, wake, live, and
die unto thee, and to the glory of thy name, and the salvation of my
soul. Lord, bless and defend all thy chosen people everywhere. Grant
our Queen a long and happy reign over us; bless all the royal family,
together with all our magistrates and ministers; comfort them who are
in misery, need, or sickness; good Lord, give me grace to be one of
those wise virgins, which may have my heart prepared like a lamp
furnished with the oil of faith, and light of good works, to meet the
Lord Jesus, the heavenly bridegroom, at his second and sudden coming in
glory. Grant this, good Father, for Christ Jesus' sake, my only Saviour
and Mediator, in whose blessed name, and in whose own words, I call
upon thee, as he hath taught me:--

"Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name," &c.

Thy grace, O Lord Jesus Christ; thy love, O heavenly Father; thy
comfort and consolation, O holy and blessed Spirit, be with me, and
dwell in my heart this night and evermore. Amen.
