## Then rising up in holy reverence, meditate as thou art putting off thy clothes--

1. That the day is coming when thou must be barely unstript of all that
thou hast in the world, as thou art now of thy clothes; thou hast,
therefore, here but the use of all things, as a steward, for a time,
and that upon accounts (Luke xvi. 2;) whilst, therefore, thou art
trusted with this stewardship be wise and faithful (Matt. xxiv. 2.)

2. When thou seest thy bed, let it put thee in mind of thy grave (Job.
xvii. 13), which is now the bed of Christ: for Christ, by laying his
holy body to rest three days and three nights in the grave (Matt. xii.
40), hath sanctified, and, as it were, warmed it for the bodies of his
saints to rest and sleep in (1 Thess. iv. 13), till the morning of the
resurrection; so that now, unto the faithful, death is but a sweet
sleep, and the grave but Christ's bed, where their bodies rest and
sleep in peace (Isa. lvii. 2), until the joyful morning of the
resurrection day shall dawn unto them (Isa. xxvi. 20.)

Let, therefore, thy bed-clothes represent to thee the mould of the
earth that shall cover thee; thy sheets, thy winding-sheet; thy sleep,
thy death; thy waking, thy resurrection: and being laid down in thy
bed, when thou perceivest sleep to approach, say, "I will lay me down
and sleep in peace, for thou, Lord, only makest me dwell in safety."
(Psal. iv. 8.)

Thus religiously opening every morning thy heart, and shutting it up
again every evening with the word of God and prayer, as it were with a
lock and key; and so beginning the day with God's worship, continuing
it in his fear, and ending it in his favour, thou shalt be sure to find
the blessing of God upon all thy day's labours and good endeavours; and
at night thou mayest assure thyself thou shalt sleep safely and sweetly
in the arms of thy heavenly Father's providence.

Thus far of the piety which every Christian, in private, ought to
practise every day. Now followeth that which he, being a householder,
must practise publicly with his family.
