## Meditations for Household Piety.

1. If thou be called to the government of a family, thou must not hold
it sufficient to serve God and live uprightly in thy own person, unless
thou cause all under thy charge to do the same with thee. For the
performance of this duty God was so well pleased with Abraham, that he
would not hide from him his counsel: "For," saith God, "I know him that
he will command his sons and his household after him that they keep the
way of the Lord, to do righteousness and judgment, that the Lord may
bring upon Abraham that he hath spoken unto him." (Gen. xviii. 19.) And
Abraham had 318 men-servants, which were thus born and catechised in
his house (Gen. xiv. 14;) with whose help he rescued also his nephew
Lot from the captivity of his enemies. And religiously valiant Joshua
protesteth before all the people, that if they all would fell away from
the true worship of God, yet that he and his house would serve the Lord
(Josh. xxiv. 15.) And God himself gives a special charge to all
householders, that they instruct their family in his word, and train
them up in his fear and service: "These words which I command thee this
day shall be in thy heart, and thou shalt whet them continually upon
thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou tarriest in thine house,
and as thou walkest by the way, and when thou liest down, and when thou
risest up," &c. "Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God and serve him."
(Deut. vi. 6, 7.) David, according to this law, had so ordered his
family, that no deceitful person should dwell in his house, but such as
would serve God and walk in his way (Psal. ci. 6, 7.). And religious
Esther had taught her maids to serve God in fasting and prayer (Esth.
iv. 16.) And, the more to further thy family in the zeal of religion,
settle ever thy chiefest affection on those whom thou shalt perceive to
be best addicted to true religion. This also will turn to thine own
advantage in a double respect--First, God will the rather bless and
prosper the labour and handiwork of such godly servants; for Laban
perceived that God blessed him for Jacob's sake (Gen. xxx. 27;) and
Potiphar saw that the Lord made all that Joseph did to prosper in his
hand (Gen. xxxix. 3;) yea, when innocent Joseph was cast into prison,
his keeper saw that whatsoever he did the Lord made it to prosper (Gen.
xxxix. 22, 23;) and therefore the keeper committed all the charge of
the prisoners into Joseph's hand. Secondly, the trulier a man serves
God, the more faithfully he will serve thee.

2. If every householder were thus careful, according to his duty, to
bring up his children and family in the service and fear of God in his
own house, then the house of God should be better filled, and the
Lord's table more frequented every Sabbath day, and the pastors' public
preaching and labour would take more effect than it doth;--the streets
of towns and cities would not abound with so many drunkards, swearers,
whoremongers, and profane scorners of true piety and religion;--our
courts would not be so full of contentions, wrangling suits, and
unchristian debates;--and the prisons would not be every session so
full of thieves, robbers, traitors, murderers. But alas! most
householders make no other use of their servants than they do of their
beasts: whilst they may have their bodies to do their service, they
care not if their souls serve the devil. Yet the common complaint is,
that faithful and good servants are scarce to be found. True, but the
reason is, because there are so many profane and irreligious masters;
for the example and instruction of a godly and religious master will
make a good and a faithful servant; as may witness the examples of
Abraham, Joshua, David, Cornelius, &c., who had good servants because
they were religious masters, such as were careful to make their
servants God's servants.

It is the chief labour and care of most men to raise and to advance
their house: yet let them "rise up early and lie down late, and eat the
bread of carefulness," all will be but in vain; for "except the Lord
build a house," that is, raise up a family, "they labour in vain."
(Psal. cxxvii. 1, 2.) For God hath sealed this as an irrevocable
decree, that he will pour out his wrath upon the families that call not
upon his name (Jer. x. 25;) yea, "God will take the wicked, and pluck
him out of his tabernacle, and root him out of the land," &c. (Psal.
lii. 5;) yea, when his iniquities are full (Gen. xv. 16), he will make
the land to spue out every Canaanite (Lev. xviii. 25.) Religion, then,
and the service of God in a family, is the best building, and surest
entailing of house and land to a man and his posterity; for "the
righteous man shall inherit the land, and dwell therein for ever."
(Psal. xxxvii. 29.)

Therefore, if thou desirest to have the blessing of God upon thyself
and upon thy family, either before or after thy own private devotions,
call every morning all the family to some convenient room; and first
either read to them thyself a chapter in the word of God, or cause it
to be read distinctly by some other. If leisure serve, thou mayest
admonish them of some remarkable notes; [48] and then kneeling down
with them in reverent sort, as is before described, pray with them in
this manner:--
