<p>
  <a class="prev" href="12.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="14.html">Next</a>
</p>

## Morning Prayer for a Family.

O Lord our God and heavenly Father, who art the only Creator and
Governor of heaven and earth, and all things contained therein, we
confess that we are unworthy to appear in thy sight and presence,
considering our manifold sins which we have committed against Heaven
and before thee; and that we have been born in sin, and daily break thy
holy laws and commandments, contrary to our knowledge and consciences;
although we know that thou art our Creator, who hast made us--our
Redeemer, who hast bought us with the blood of thine only-begotten
Son--and our Comforter, who bestowest upon us all the good and holy
graces which we enjoy in our souls and bodies. And if thou shouldst but
deal with us as our wickedness and unthankfulness have deserved, what
other thing might we, O Lord, expect from thee but shame and confusion
in this life, and in the world to come, wrath and everlasting
condemnation? Yet, O Lord, in the obedience of thy commandment, and in
the confidence which we have in thy unspeakable and endless mercy in
thy Son, our Saviour Jesus Christ, we thy poor servants, appealing from
thy throne of justice, where we are justly lost and condemned, to thy
throne of grace, where mercy reigneth to pardon abounding sin, do from
the bottom of our hearts most humbly beseech thee to remit and forgive
unto us all our offences and misdeeds; that by the virtue of the
precious blood of Jesus Christ, thine innocent Lamb, which he so
abundantly shed to take away the sins of the world, all our sins, both
original and actual, may be so cleansed and washed from us, as that
they may never be laid to our charge, nor ever have power to rise up in
judgment against us. And we beseech thee, good Father, for Christ's
death and passion's sake, that thou wilt not suffer to fall upon us
that fearful curse and vengeance which thy law hath threatened, and our
sins have justly deserved. And forasmuch, O Lord, as we are taught by
thy word, that idolaters, adulterers, covetous men, contentious
persons, drunkards, gluttons, and such-like inordinate livers, shall
not inherit the kingdom of God, pour the grace of thy Holy Spirit into
our hearts, whereby we may be enlightened to see the filthiness of our
sins, to abhor them, and may be more and more stirred up to live in
newness of life, and love of thy majesty, so that we may daily increase
in the obedience of thy word, and in a conscientious care of keeping
thy commandments.

And now, O Lord, we render unto thee most hearty thanks for that thou
hast elected, created, redeemed, called, justified, and sanctified us
in good measure in this life, and given us an assured hope that thou
wilt glorify us in thy heavenly kingdom when this mortal life is ended.
Likewise we thank thee for our life, health, wealth, liberty,
prosperity, and peace; especially, O Lord, for the continuance of thy
holy gospel among us, and for sparing us so long, and granting us so
gracious a time of repentance. Also we praise thee for all other
mercies bestowed upon us, more especially for preserving us this night
past, from all danger that might have befallen our souls or bodies. And
seeing thou hast now brought us safe to the beginning of this day, we
beseech thee protect and direct us in the same. Bless and defend us in
our going out and coming in this day, and evermore. Shield us, O Lord,
from the temptations of the devil, and grant us the custody of thy holy
angels to defend and direct us in all our ways.

And to this end we recommend ourselves, and all those that belong to
us, and are abroad from us, into thy hands and almighty tuition. Lord,
defend them from all evil, prosper them in all graces, and fill them
with thy goodness. Preserve us likewise this day from falling into any
gross sin, especially those to which our natures are most prone. Set a
watch before the door of our lips, that we offend not thy majesty by
any rash or false oaths, or by any lewd or lying speeches. Give to us
patient minds, pure hearts, and all other graces of thy Spirit which
thou knowest to be needful for us, that we may the better be enabled to
serve thee in holiness and righteousness. And seeing that all man's
labour without thy blessing is in vain, bless every one of us in our
several places and callings; direct thou the work of our hands upon us,
even prosper thou our handiwork; for except thou guide us with thy
grace, our endeavours can have no good success. And provide for us all
things which thou, O Father, knowest to be needful for every one of us,
in our souls and bodies, this day. And grant that we may so pass
through the pilgrimage of this short life, that our hearts being not
settled upon any transitory things which we meet with in the way, our
souls may every day be more and more ravished with the love of our
home, and thy everlasting kingdom.

Defend likewise, O Lord, thy universal church, and every particular
member thereof: especially we beseech thee to continue the peace and
prosperity of these churches and kingdoms wherein we live. Preserve and
defend from all evils and dangers our gracious Queen, with all the
royal family; multiply their days in bliss and felicity, and afterwards
crown them with everlasting joy and glory. Bless all our ministers and
magistrates, with all graces needful for their places; and govern thou
them, that they may govern us in peace and godliness. And of thy mercy,
O Lord, comfort all our brethren that are distressed, sick, or any way
comfortless, especially those who are afflicted either with an evil
conscience, because they have sinned against thy word, or for a good
conscience, because they will not sin against thy truth. Make the first
to know, that not one drop of the blood of Christ was a drop of
vengeance, but all drops of grace, powerful to procure pardon upon
repentance, for the greatest sins of the chiefest sinner in the world.
And for the other, let not, O Lord, thy long sufferance either too much
discourage them, or too much encourage their enemies: but grant them
patience in suffering, and a gracious and speedy deliverance, which way
may stand best with their comfort and thy glory. Give every one of us
grace to be always mindful of his last end, and to be prepared with
faith and repentance, as with a wedding-garment, against the time that
thou shalt call for us out of this sinful world. And that in the
meanwhile we may so in all things, and above all things, seek thy
glory, that when this mortal life is ended, we may then be made
partakers of immortality and life eternal, in thy most blessed and
glorious kingdom.

These, and all other graces, which thou, O Father, seest to be
necessary for us, and for thy whole church, we humbly beg and crave at
thy hands; concluding this our imperfect prayer, in that absolute form
of prayer which Christ himself hath taught us--"Our Father which art in
heaven, hallowed be thy name," &c.

After prayers, let every one of thy household (taking in the fear of
God such a breakfast or refreshing as is fit) depart--the children to
school, the servants to their work: every one to his office, the master
and mistress of the family to their callings, or to some honest
exercises for recreation, as they think fit.

[48] Origen would have the word expounded in Christian houses.--Hom. 9,
in Lev. Augustine saith, That what the preacher is in the pulpit, the
same the householder is in the house.

<p>
  <a class="prev" href="12.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="14.html">Next</a>
</p>
