## Rules to be observed in Singing of Psalms.

1. Beware of singing divine psalms for an ordinary recreation, as do
men of impure spirits, who sing holy psalms intermingled with profane
ballads: They are God's word: take them not in thy mouth in vain.

2. Remember to sing David's psalms with David's spirit (Matt. xxii.
43.)

3. Practise St. Paul's rule--"I will sing with the spirit, but I will
sing with the understanding also." (1 Cor. xiv. 15.)

4. As you sing uncover your heads (1 Cor. xi. 4), and behave yourselves
in comely reverence as in the sight of God, singing to God in God's own
words; but be sure that the matter make more melody in your hearts
(Eph. v. 19; Col. iii. 16) than the music in your ear; for the singing
with grace in our hearts is that which the Lord is delighted withal,
according to that old verse:

  Non vox, sed votum; non miisica chordula, sed cor:

  Non clamans, sed amana, psallit in aure Dei.

  Tis not the voice, but vow;

  Sound heart, not sounding string;

  True zeal, not outward show,

  That in God's ear doth ring.

5. Thou mayest, if thou thinkest good, sing all the psalms over in
order, for all are most divine and comfortable; but if thou wilt choose
some special psalms, as more fit for some times and purposes, and such
as, by the oft usage, thy people may the easier commit to memory.

Then sing:

In the morning, Psalm iii. v. xvi. xxii. cxliv. In the evening, Psalm
iv. cxxvii. cxli. For mercy after a sin committed, Psalm li. ciii. In
sickness or heaviness, Psalm vi. xiii. lxxxviii. xc. xci. cxxxvii.
cxlvi. When thou art recovered, Psalm xxx. xxxii. On the Sabbath day,
Psalm xix. xcii. xcv. In time of joy, Psalm lxxx. xcviii. cvii. cxxxvi.
cxlv. Before sermon, Psalm i. xii. cxlvii. the 1st and 5th parts of the
cxix. After sermon, any Psalm which concerneth the chief argument of
the sermon. At the communion, Psalm xxii. xxiii. ciii. cxi. cxvi. For
spiritual solace, Psalm xv. xix. xxv. xlvi. lxvii. cxii. cxvi. After
wrong and disgrace received, Psalm xlii. lxix. lxx. cxl. cxliv.

After the psalm, all kneeling down in a reverent manner, as is before
described, let the father of the family, or the chiefest in his
absence, pray thus:
