## Evening Prayer for a Family.

O eternal God and most gracious Father, we thine unworthy servants here
assembled, do cast down ourselves at the footstool of thy grace,
acknowledging that we have inherited our fathers' corruption, and
actually in thought, word, and deed, transgressed all thy holy
commandments, so that in us naturally there dwelleth nothing that is
good; for our hearts are full of secret pride, anger, impatience,
dissembling, lying, lust, vanity, profaneness, distrust, too much love
of ourselves and the world, too little love of thee and thy kingdom,
but empty and void of faith, love, patience, and every spiritual grace.
If thou, therefore, shouldst but enter into judgment with us, and
search out our natural corruption, and observe all the cursed fruits
and effects that we have derived from thence, Satan might justly
challenge us for his own, and we could not expect anything from thy
Majesty but thy wrath, and our condemnation, which we have long ago
deserved; but, good Father, for Jesus Christ thy dear Son's sake, in
whom only thou art well pleased, and for the merits of that bitter
death and bloody passion which we believe that he hath suffered for us,
have mercy upon us, pardon and forgive us all our sins, and free us
from the shame and confusion which are due unto us for them, that they
may never seize upon us to our confusion in this life, nor to our
condemnation in the world which is to come. And forasmuch as thou hast
created us to serve thee, as all other creatures to serve us, so, we
beseech thee, inspire thy Holy Spirit into our hearts, that by his
illumination and effectual working, we may have the inward sight and
feeling of our sins and natural corruptions, and that we may not be
blinded in them through custom, as the reprobates are, but that we may
more and more loath them, and be heartily grieved for them,
endeavouring by the use of all good means to overcome and get out of
them. O let us feel the power of Christ's death killing sin in our
mortal bodies (Rom. vi. 6; Phil. iii. 10), and the virtue of his
resurrection raising up our souls to newness of life: convert our
hearts, subdue our affections, regenerate our minds, and purify our
nature, and suffer us not to be drowned in the stream of those filthy
vices and sinful pleasures of this time, wherewith thousands are
carried headlong to eternal destruction; but daily frame us more and
more to the likeness of thy Son Jesus Christ (Rom. viii. 29), that in
righteousness and true holiness (Eph. iv. 24), we may so serve and
glorify thee, that living in thy fear and dying in thy favour, we may
in thine appointed time attain to the blessed resurrection of the just
unto eternal life. In the meanwhile, O Lord, increase our faith in the
sweet promises of the gospel, and our repentance from dead works, the
assurance of our hope in the promises, our fear of thy name, the hatred
of all our sins, and our love to thy children, especially those whom we
shall see to stand in need of our help and comfort; that so by the
fruits of piety and a righteous life, We may be assured that thy Holy
Spirit dwells in us, and that we are thy children by grace and
adoption: and grant us, good Father, the continuance of health, peace,
maintenance, and all other outward things, so far as thy divine wisdom
shall think meet and necessary for every one of us.

And here, O Lord, according to our bounden duty, we confess that thou
hast been exceeding merciful unto us all in things of this life, but
infinitely more merciful in the things of a better life; and therefore
we do here from our very souls render unto thee all humble and hearty
thanks for all thy blessings and benefits bestowed upon our souls and
bodies, acknowledging thee to be that Father of lights from whom we
have received all those good and perfect gifts; and unto thee alone for
them we ascribe to be due all glory, honour, and praise, both now and
evermore; but more especially we praise thy divine Majesty for that
thou hast defended us this day from all perils and dangers, so that
none of those judgments, which our sins have deserved, have fallen upon
us. Good Lord, forgive us the sins which this day we have committed
against thy divine Majesty and our brethren, and for Christ's sake be
reconciled unto us for them; and we beseech thee likewise of thine
infinite goodness and mercy, to defend and protect us, and all that
belong to us, this night from all dangers of fire, robbery, terrors of
evil angels, or any other fear or peril, which for our sins might
justly fall upon us; and that we may be safe under the shadow of thy
wings, we here commend our bodies and souls, and all that we have, unto
thine almighty protection. Lord bless and defend both us and them from
all evil; and whilst we sleep, do thou, O Father, who never slumberest
nor sleepest, watch over thy children, and give a charge to thy holy
angels to pitch their tents round about our house and dwelling, to
guard us from all dangers, that sleeping with thee, we may in the next
morning be awakened by thee, and so being refreshed with moderate
sleep, we may be the fitter to set forth thy glory in the conscionable
duties of our callings.

And we beseech thee, O Lord, to be merciful likewise to thy whole
church, and to continue the tranquillity of these kingdoms wherein we
live, turning from us those plagues which the crying sins of this
nation do cry for.

Preserve our Queen, with the rest of the royal family; all our
magistrates and ministers; all that fear thee, and call upon thy name;
all our Christian brethren and sisters, that suffer sicknes6, or any
other affliction or misery, especially those who anywhere suffer
persecution for the testimony of the holy gospel: grant them patience
to bear thy cross, and deliverance when and which way it shall seem
best to thy divine wisdom. And, Lord, suffer us never to forget our
last end, and those reckonings which then we must render unto thee. In
health and prosperity make us mindful of sickness, and of the evil day
that is behind, that these things may not overtake us as a snare, but
that we may in good measure, like wise virgins, be found prepared for
the coming of Christ, the sweet bridegroom of our souls. And now, O
Lord most holy and just, we confess that there is no cause why thou,
who art so much displeased with sin, shouldst hear the prayer of
sinners, but for his sake only who suffered for sin, and sinned not. In
the only mediation, therefore, of thine eternal Son Jesus our Lord and
Saviour, we humbly beg these, and all other graces which thou knowest
to be needful for us, shutting up these our imperfect requests in that
most holy prayer which Christ himself has taught us to say unto thee:--

"Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name," &c.

Thy grace, O Lord Jesus Christ; thy love, O heavenly Father; thy
comfort and consolation, O holy and blessed Spirit, be with us, and
remain with us, this night and evermore. Amen.

Then saluting one another, as becometh Christians who are the vessels
of grace, and temples of the Holy Ghost, let them in the fear of God
depart every one to his rest: using some of the former private
meditations for evening.

Thus far of the householder's public practice of piety with his family
every day: Now follows his practice of piety with the Church on the
Sabbath-day.
