## Meditations of the True Manner of Practising Piety on the Sabbath-Day.

Almighty God will have himself worshipped, not only in a private manner
by private persons and families, but also in a more public sort, of all
the godly joined together in a visible church; that by this means he
may be known not only to be the God and Lord of every Singular person,
but also of the creatures of the whole universal world.

Question--But why do not we Christians under the New, keep the Sabbath
on the same seventh day on which it was kept under the Old Testament?

I answer--Because our Lord Jesus, who is the Lord of the Sabbath (Matt.
xii. 8), and whom the law itself commands us to hear (Deut. xviii. 18,
19), did alter it from that seventh day to this first day of the week
on which we keep the Sabbath. For the holy evangelist notes, that our
Lord came into the midst of the holy assembly on the two first days of
the two weeks immediately following his resurrection, and then blessed
the church, breathed on the apostles the Holy Ghost, and gave them the
ministerial keys, and power of binding and remitting sins (John xx. 22,
23.) And so it is most probable he did in a solemn manner every first
day of the week, during the forty days he continued on earth between
his resurrection and ascension (for the fiftieth day after, being the
first day of the week, the apostles were assembled;) during which time
he gave commandments unto the apostles, and "spake unto them those
things which appertain to the kingdom of God," (Acts i. 2, 3), [51]
that is, instructed them how they should, throughout the churches which
were to be converted, change the Sabbath to the Lord's day; the bodily
sacrifices of beasts, to the spiritual sacrifices of praise, prayer,
and contrite hearts; the Levitical priesthood of the law, to the
Christian ministry of the gospel (Heb. vii. 11, 12;) the Jewish temples
and synagogues, to churches and oratories; the old sacraments of
circumcision and passover, to baptism and the Lord's Supper, &c. as may
appear by the like phrase (Acts xix. 8; xxviii. 23; Col. iv. 11), put
for the whole sum of Paul's doctrine, by which were wrought all these
changes, where it took effect. So that as Christ was forty days
instructing Moses in Sinai, what he should teach, and how he should
rule the church under the law; so he continued forty days teaching his
disciples in Sion, what they should preach, and how they should govern
the church under the gospel (Eph. iv. 8, 11, 12.) And seeing it is
manifest, that within those forty days Christ appointed what ministers
should teach, and how they should govern his church to the world's end,
it is not to be doubted but that within those forty days he likewise
ordained on what day they should keep their Sabbath, and ordinarily do
the works of their ministry; especially seeing that under the Old
Testament, God shewed himself as careful, both by his moral and
ceremonial law, to prescribe the time, as well as the matter of his
worship. Neither is it a thing to be omitted, that the Lord, who hath
times and seasons in his own power (Acts i. 7), appointed this first
day of the week to be the very day in which he sent down from heaven
the Holy Ghost upon the apostles (Acts ii. 1, &c.), so that upon that
day they first began, and ever after continued the public exercising of
their ministry, in the preaching of the word (Acts ii. 1, 4), the
administration of the sacraments (Acts ii. 38, 41, 42), and the loosing
of the sins of penitent sinners (Acts ii. 38.) Upon these, and the like
grounds, Athanasius plainly affirms that the Sabbath-day was changed by
the Lord himself. [52]

As, therefore, our communion is termed the Lord's Supper, because it
was instituted of the Lord, for the remembrance of his death; so the
Christian Sabbath is called the Lord's day (Rev. i. 10), because it was
ordained of the Lord, for the memorial of his resurrection. [53] And as
the name of the Lord (1 Cor. xi. 10) honours the one, so does it the
other; and as the Lord of the Sabbath, by his royal prerogative, and
transcendent authority, could, so he had also reason to change the holy
Sabbath from the seventh day to this, on which we keep it; for as
concerning the seventh day, which followed the six days in which God
finished the creation, there was no such precise institution, or
necessity of sanctifying it perpetually, but such as by the same
authority, or upon greater reason and occasion, it might very well be
changed and altered to some other seventh day; for the commandment does
not say, Remember to keep holy the seventh day next following the sixth
day of the creation, or this or that seventh day; but indefinitely,
Remember that thou keep holy a seventh day. [54] And to speak properly,
as we take a day for the distinction of time, called either a day
natural, consisting of twenty-four hours, or a day artificial,
consisting of twelve hours, from sun rising to sun setting; and withal
consider the sun standing still at noon, in Joshua's time (Josh. x. 12,
43) the space of a whole day; and the sun going back ten degrees (2
Kings xx. 11), viz. five hours, almost half an artificial day, in
Ezechiah's time; the Jews themselves could not keep their Sabbath upon
that precise and just distinction of time, called at the first the
seventh day from the creation.

Add to this, that in respect of the diversity of meridians, and the
unequal rising and setting of the sun, every day varies in some places
a quarter, in some half, in others a whole day. Therefore the Jewish
seventh day cannot precisely be kept at the same instant of time every
where in the world.

Now our Lord Jesus having authority as Lord over the Sabbath (Matt.
xii. 8), had likewise now far greater reason and occasion to translate
the Sabbath from the Jewish seventh day to the first day on which
Christians keep the Sabbath.

1. Because that by his resurrection from the dead, there is wrought a
new spiritual creation of the world, without which all the sons of Adam
had been turned to everlasting destruction, and all the works of the
first creation had ministered no consolation to us (Isa. lxv. 17, &c.;
lxvi. 22; Psal. xc. 2.)

2. And in respect of this new spiritual creation, the Scripture saith,
"That old things are passed away, and all things are become new," (2
Cor. v. 17)--new creatures (Gal. vi. 15), new people (1 Pet. ii. 10),
new men (Eph. iv. 24), new knowledge (Col. iii. 10), new testament
(Matt. xxvi. 28), new commandment (John xii. 13), new names (Rev. ii.
17), new way (Heb. x. 10), new song (Rev. iii. 9), new garment (Luke v.
36, 37), new wine, new vessels (Rev. xxi. 2), new Jerusalem (2 Pet.
iii. 13), new heaven, and a new earth (Isa. lxvi. 22) And therefore of
necessity there must be, instead of the old, a new Sabbath-day (Heb.
iv. 9), to honour and praise our Redeemer, and to meditate upon the
work of our redemption, and to shew the new change of the Old
Testament.

3. Because that on this day Christ rested from all the sufferings of
his passion, and finished the glorious work of our redemption. If,
therefore, the finishing of the work of the first creation, by which
God mightily manifested himself to his creatures, deserved a sabbath to
solemnize the memorial of so great a work, to the honour of the worker,
and therefore calls it "mine holy day," (Isa. lviii. 13;) much more
does the new creation of the world, effected by the resurrection of
Christ, whereby he mightily declared himself to be the Son of God (Rom.
i. 4), deserve a sabbath, for the perpetual commemoration of it, to the
honour of Christ, and therefore worthily called the Lord's day (Rev. i.
10.) For, as the deliverance out of the captivity of Babylon, being
greater, took away the name from the deliverance out of the bondage of
Egypt (Jer. xxiii. 7, 8;) so the day on which Christ finished the
redemption of the world did more justly deserve to have the Sabbath
kept on it, than on that day on which God ceased from creating the
world. As, therefore, in the creation, the first day wherein it was
finished, was consecrated for a sabbath; so in the time of redemption,
the first day wherein it was perfected must be dedicated to a holy
rest; but still a seventh day kept according to God's moral
commandment. The Jews kept the last day of the week, beginning their
Sabbath with the night (Gen. ii. 2; Lev. xxiii. 32; Neh. xiii. 19),
when God rested; but Christians honour the Lord better, on the first
day of the week (Matt. xxviii. 1), beginning the Sabbath with the day
when the Lord arose (Acts xx. 7, 11.) They kept their Sabbath in
remembrance, of the world's creation; but Christians celebrate it in
memorial of the world's redemption; yea, the Lord's day being the first
of the creation and redemption, puts us in mind, both of the making of
the old, and redeeming of the new world.

As, therefore, under the Old Testament, God, by the glory consisting of
seven lamps, seven branches, &c. (Exod. xxv. 31), put them in
remembrance of the creation, light, and Sabbath's rest; so, under the
New Testament, Christ, the true light of the world, appears in the
midst of the seven lamps, and seven golden candlesticks (Rev. i. 13),
to put us in mind to honour our Redeemer in the light of the gospel of
the Lord's seventh day of rest. And seeing the redemption, both for
might and mercy, so far exceeds the creation, it stood with great
reason that the greater work should carry the honour of the day.
Neither does the honourable title of the Lord's day diminish the glory
of the Sabbath; but rather, being added, augments the dignity of it; as
the name Israel, added to Jacob, made the patriarch the more renowned
(Gen. xxxii. 28.)

The reason taken from the example of God's resting from the work of the
creation of the world continued in force till the Son of God ceased
from the work of the redemption of the world, and then the former gave
place to the latter.

4. Because it was foretold in the Old Testament that the Sabbath should
be kept under the New Testament on the first day of the week.

For, first, in the 110th Psalm, which is a prophecy of Christ and his
kingdom, it is plainly foretold that there should be a solemn day of
assembling, wherein all Christ's people should willingly come together
in the beauty of holiness (Psal. cx. 3;) insomuch that no rain (of
peace) shall be upon those families that in that feast will not go up
to Jerusalem (the church) to worship the King, the Lord of Hosts (Zech.
xiv. 17.) Now on what day this holy feast and assembly should be kept,
David shews plainly in Psalm cxviii., which was a prophecy of Christ,
as appears, Matt. xxi. 42; Acts iv. 11; Eph. ii. 20, as also by the
consent of all the Jews, as Jerome witnesses. For, shewing how Christ,
by his ignominious death, should be as a stone rejected of the
builders, or chief rulers of Judea, and yet, by his glorious
resurrection, should become the chief stone of the corner, he wishes
the whole church to keep holy that day upon which Christ should effect
this wonderful work, saying, "This is the day which the Lord hath made,
let us rejoice and be glad in it." (Psal. cxviii. 24.) And seeing that
upon this day that which Peter says of Christ appears to be true, that
"God made him both Lord and Christ." (Acts ii. 36.) Therefore the whole
church under the New Testament must celebrate the day of Christ's
resurrection. Rabbi Bachay also saw, by the fall of Adam on the sixth
day, that on the same day Messias should finish the work of man's
redemption; and, alluding to the speech of Boaz to Ruth, "sleep unto
the morning," that Messias should rest in his grave all their
Sabbath-day. And he gathers from that speech (Gen. i.) on the first
day, "Let there be light," that the Messias should rise on the first
day of the week from death to life, and cause the spiritual light of
the gospel to enlighten the world, that lay in the shadow of darkness
and death. The Hebrew author of the book called Sedar Olam Rabbi (cap.
7) records many memorable things which were done upon the first day of
the week, as so many types that the chief worship of God should, under
the New Testament, be celebrated upon this day: As, that on this day
the cloud of God's majesty first sate upon his people; Aaron and his
children first executed their priesthood; God first solemnly blessed
his people; the princes of his people first offered publicly unto God;
the first day wherein fire descended from heaven; the first day of the
world, of the year, of the month, of the week, &c.; all shadowing that
it should be the first and chief holy day of the New Testament. St.
Augustine proves, by divers places and reasons out of the holy
Scripture, that the fathers, and all the holy prophets under the Old
Testament, did foresee and know that our Lord's day was shadowed by
their eighth day of circumcision, and that the Sabbath should be
changed from the seventh day to the eighth, or first day of the week.
And Junius, out of Cyprian, says, that circumcision was commanded on
the eighth day, as a sacrament of the eighth day, when Christ should
arise from the dead. The council Foro Juliense affirms, that Isaiah
prophesied of the keeping of the Sabbath upon the first day of the
week. If this mystery was so clearly seen by the Fathers under the
shadows of the Old Testament, surely the god of this world has deeply
blinded their minds who cannot see the truth of it under the shining
light of the gospel (2 Cor. iv. 4.) Therefore this change of the
Sabbath-day under the New, was nothing but a fulfilling of that which
was prefigured and fore-prophesied under the Old Testament.

5. According to their Lord's mind and commandment, and the direction of
the Holy Ghost, which always assisted them in their ministerial office,
the apostles, in all the Christian churches which they planted,
ordained that the Christians should keep the holy Sabbath upon that
seventh day, which is the first day of the week: "Concerning the
gathering for the saints, as I have ordained in the churches of
Galatia, so do ye also. Every first day of the week," &c. (1 Cor. xvi.
1, 2.) "When ye come together in the church (being the Lord's day) to
eat the Lord's Supper, [55] to remember and shew the Lord's death till
he come," &c. (1 Cor. xi. 20, 25, 26.) In which words note--

(1.) That the apostle ordained this day to be kept holy: therefore a
divine institution.

(2.) That the day is named the first day of the week: therefore not the
Jewish seventh, or any other.

(3.) Every first day of the week, which shews a perpetuity.

(4.) That it was ordained in the churches of Galatia, as well as of
Corinth, and he settled one uniform order in all the churches of the
saints: therefore it was universal.

(5.) That the exercises of this day were collections for the poor
(which appears by Acts ii. 42, and Justin Martyr's testimony, Apolog.
ii. [56] ), which were gathered in the holy assembly after prayer,
preaching of the word, and administration of the sacraments: therefore
it was spiritual.

(6.) That he will have the collection, though necessary, removed
against his coming; lest it should hinder his preaching; but not their
holy meeting on the Lord's day, for it was the time ordained for the
public worship of the Lord, which argues a necessity.

And in the same Epistle St. Paul protests, that he delivered them none
other ordinance or doctrine but what he hath received of the Lord (1
Cor. xi. 23.) Insomuch that he charges them, that "if any man think
himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the
things that I write unto you are the commandments of the Lord." (1 Cor.
xiv. 37.) But he wrote unto them, and ordained among them to keep their
Sabbath on the first day of the week: therefore to keep the Sabbath on
that day is the very commandment of the Lord; and how can he be either
a true prophet, or have any grace of God's Spirit in his heart, who,
seeing so clearly the Lord's day to have been instituted and ordained
by the apostles, will not acknowledge the keeping holy of the Lord's
day to be a commandment of the Lord?

The Jews confess this change of the Sabbath to have been made by the
apostles (Peter Alphon in Dialog, contra Judæos, tit. 12); they are
therefore more blind and sottish than the Jews, who profanely deny it.

At Troas likewise St. Paul, together with seven of the chief
evangelists of the church, Sopater, Aristarchus, Secundus, Gaius,
Timotheus, Tychicus, and Trophimus (Acts xx. 4, 5, &c.), and all the
Christians that were there, kept the holy Sabbath on the first day of
the week, in praying, preaching, and receiving the Lord's Supper.

And it is a thing to be noted, that Luke saith not, that the disciples
were sent to hear Paul preach, but the disciples being come together to
break bread upon the first day of the week, that is, to be partakers of
the holy communion, at what time the Lord's death was by the preaching
of the word shewed (1 Cor. xviii. 26), Paul preached unto them, &c. And
that none kept those meetings but Christians, who are called disciples
(Acts xi. 26.) But at Philippi, where as yet there was no disciples,
Paul is said to go on their Sabbath day to the place where the Jews and
their proselytes were wont to pray, and there preached unto them (Acts
xvi. 12, 13.) So that it is as clear as the sun, that it was the
Christians' usual manner to pass over the Jewish seventh day (Acts xxi.
4, &c.), and to keep the Sabbath and their holy meetings on the first
day of the week. And why does St. John call this the Lord's day, but
because it was a day known to be generally kept holy throughout all the
churches which the apostles planted to the honour of the Lord Jesus,
who rose from death to life upon that day; which St. John called the
Lord's day (Rev. i. 10), the rather to stir up Christians to a thankful
remembrance of their redemption by Christ's resurrection from the dead.
And with the day, the blessing of the Sabbath is likewise translated to
the Lord's day; because all the sanctification belonging to this new
world is in Christ (Heb. ii. 5), and from him conveyed to Christians:
and because there cannot come a greater authority than that of Christ
and his apostles, nor the like cause as the new creation of the world;
therefore the Sabbath can never be altered from this day to any other
whilst this world lasts. Add to this, how the Scripture notes, that in
the first planting and settling of the church, nothing was done but by
the special order and direction of the apostles (1 Cor. xi. 34; xiv.
36, 37; Tit. i. 5; Acts xv. 6, 24), and the apostles did nothing but
what they had warrant for from Christ (1 Cor. xi. 23.)

To sanctify, then, the Sabbath on the seventh day is not a ceremonial
law abrogated, but the moral and perpetual law of God perfected; so
that the same perpetual commandment which bound the Jews to keep the
Sabbath on that seventh day, to celebrate the world's creation, binds
Christians to solemnize the Sabbath on this seventh day, in memorial of
the world's redemption; for the fourth commandment being a moral law,
requires a seventh day to be kept holy for ever. And the morality of
this, as of the rest of the commandments, is more religiously to be
kept of us under the gospel, than of the Jews under the law; by how
much we, in baptism, have made a more special covenant with God to keep
his commandments; and God has covenanted with us to free us from the
curse, and to assist us with his Spirit to keep his laws. And that this
commandment of the Sabbath, as well as the other nine, is moral and
perpetual, may plainly appear by these reasons:--

Ten Reasons demonstrating the Commandment of the Sabbath to be moral.

1. Because all the reasons of this commandment are moral and perpetual;
and God has bound us to the obedience of this commandment with more
forcible reasons than to any of the rest--First, because he foresaw
that irreligious men would either more carelessly neglect, or more
boldly break this commandment than any other; secondly, because that in
the practice of this commandment the keeping of all the other consists;
which makes God so often complain that all his worship is neglected or
overthrown, when the Sabbath is either neglected or transgressed (Jer.
xv. 22; Ezek. xx. 19, 20, 21, 24; xxiii. 38; Neh. ix. 4.) "It would
make a man amazed," saith Mr. Calvin, "to consider how oft, and with
what zeal and protestation God requireth all, that will be his people,
to sanctify the seventh day; yea, how the God of mercy mercilessly
punisheth the breach of this commandment with cruel death, as though it
were the sum of his whole honour and service."

And it is certain, that he who makes no conscience to break the
Sabbath, will not, to serve his turn, make any conscience to break any
of the other commandments, so he may do it without discredit of his
reputation or danger of man's law. Therefore God placed this
commandment in the midst of the two tables, because the keeping of it
is the best help to the keeping of all the rest. The conscionable
keeping of the Sabbath is the mother of all religion and good
discipline in the church. Take away the Sabbath, and let every man
serve God when he listeth; and what will shortly become of religion,
and that peace and order (1 Cor. xiv. 33, 40) which God will have to be
kept in his church? The Sabbath-day is God's market-day, for the week's
provision; wherein He will have us to come to him, and buy of him
without silver or money (Isa. lv. 1, 2), the bread of angels, and water
of life, the wine of the sacrament, and milk of the word to feed our
souls; tried gold to enrich our faith (Rev. iii. 18;) precious
eye-salve, to heal our spiritual blindness; and the white raiment of
Christ's righteousness, to cover our filthy nakedness. He is not far
from true piety, who makes conscience to keep the Sabbath-day; but he
who can dispense with his conscience to break the Sabbath for his own
profit or pleasure, his heart never yet felt what either the fear of
God or true religion means; for, of this commandment may that speech of
St. James be verified, "He that faileth in one, is guilty of all."
(James ii. 10.) Seeing, therefore, that God has fenced this commandment
with so many moral reasons, it is evident that the commandment itself
is moral.

2. Because it was commanded of God to Adam in his innocency: whilst
holding his happiness, not by faith in Christ's merits, but by
obedience to God's law, he needed no ceremony shadowing the redemption
of Christ. A Sabbath, therefore, of a seventh day cannot be simply a
ceremony, but an essential part of God's worship, enjoined to man, when
there was but one condition of all men. And if it was necessary for our
first parents to have a Sabbath-day, to serve God in their perfection;
much more need their posterity to keep the Sabbath in the state of
{heir corruption. And seeing God himself kept this day holy, how can
that man be holy that wilfully profanes it?

3. Because it is one of the commandments which God spake with his
mouth, and twice wrote with his own fingers in tables of stone, to
signify their authority and perpetuity (Exod. xxxiv. 1, &c.) All that
God wrote, were moral and perpetual commandments, and those are
reckoned ten in number (Deut. iv. 13.) If this were now but an
abrogated ceremony, then there were but nine commandments. The
ceremonial that was to be abrogated by Christ, were all written by
Moses (Deut. iv. 2.) But this of the Sabbath, with the other nine,
written by God himself, were put into the ark; no ceremonial law was
put, to shew that they should be the perpetual rules of the church, yet
such as none could perfectly fulfil and keep, but only Christ (1 Kings
viii. 9; Heb. ix. 4.)

4. Because Christ professes, "that he came not to detroy the moral
law," (Matt. v. 17), and that the least of them should not be abrogated
in his kingdom of the New Testament. Insomuch, that "whosoever breaketh
one of the least of these ten commandments, and teacheth men so, he
should be called the least in the kingdom of heaven," (Matt. v. 19;)
that is, he should have no place in his church. Now the moral law
commands one day of seven to be perpetually kept a holy Sabbath. And
Christ himself expressly mentions the keeping of a Sabbath among his
Christians, at the destruction of Jerusalem, about forty-two years
after his resurrection. By which time, all the Mosaical ceremonies,
except eating of blood, and things strangled (Acts xv. 19, 20, 21, 24,
28), were by a public decree of all the apostles quite abolished, and
abrogated in Christian churches. And therefore Christ admonished his
disciples, "to pray that their flight be not in the winter, nor on the
Sabbath-day." (Matt. xxiv. 20.) Not in the winter; for by reason of the
foulness of the ways and weather, their flight then should be more
painful and troublesome to them: not upon the Sabbath; because it would
be more grievous to their hearts, to spend that day in toiling to save
their lives, which the Lord had commanded to be spent in holy
exercises, to comfort their souls. Now if the sanctifying of the
Sabbath on this day had been but ceremonial, it had been no grief to
have fled on this day, any more than on any other day of the week; but
in that Christ doth tender so much this fear and grief of being driven
to fly on the Sabbath-day, and therefore wisheth his followers to pray
to God to prevent. such an occasion, he plainly demonstrates that the
observation of the Sabbath is no abrogated ceremony, but a moral
commandment, confirmed and established by Christ among Christians. If
you would know the day whereupon Christ appointed Christians to keep
the Sabbath, St. John will tell you, that it was on the Lord's day
(Rev. i. 10.) If you will know on what day of the week that was, St.
Paul will tell you, that it was on every first day of the week (1 Cor.
xvi. 1.)

As Christ admonished, so Christians prayed, and according to their
prayers, God, a little before the wars began, warned by an oracle all
the Christians in Jerusalem to depart thence, and to go to Pella, a
little town beyond Jordan; and so to escape the wrath of God, that
should fall upon that city and nation. [57] If, then, a Christian
should not without grief of heart, fly for the safety of his life on
the Lord's day; with what joy or comfort can a true Christian neglect
the holy exercise of God's worship in the church, to spend the greatest
part of the Lord's day in profane and carnal sports, or servile labour?
And seeing the destruction of Jerusalem was both a type (Matt. xxiv.
35) and an assurance of the destruction of the world, who seeth not,
but that the holy Sabbath must continue till the very end of the world?

5. Because all the ceremonial law was enjoined to the Jews only, and
not to the Gentiles; but this commandment of the holy Sabbath, as
matrimony, was instituted of God in the state of innocency, when there
was but one state of all men, and therefore enjoined to the Gentiles as
well as to the Jews. So that all magistrates and householders were
commanded to constrain all strangers, as well as their own subjects and
family, to observe the holy Sabbath (Isa. lvi. 6), as appears by the
fourth commandment, and the practice of Nehemiah (Neh. xiii. 19, &c.)
All the ceremonies were a partition-wall to separate Jews and Gentiles
(Eph. ii. 14;) but seeing the Gentiles are bound to keep this
commandment as well as the Jews, it is evident that it is no Jewish
ceremony. And seeing the same authority is for the Sabbath that is for
marriage, a man may as well say that marriage is but a ceremonial law,
as the Sabbath. And remember, that whereas marriage is termed but once
the covenant of God (Prov. ii. 17), because instituted by God in the
beginning (Matt. xix. 6, 8), the Sabbath is everywhere called "the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God," because ordained by God in the same
beginning, both of time, state, and perpetuity: therefore not
ceremonial.

6. The corruption of our nature found in the manifest opposition of
wicked men, [58] and in the secret unwillingness of good men to
sanctify sincerely the Sabbath, sufficiently demonstrates that the
commandment of the Sabbath is spiritual and moral.

7. Because that as God, by a perpetual decree, made the sun, the moon,
and other lights in the firmament of heaven (Gen. i. 18; Job ix. 9;
xxxviii. 31; Amos v. 8), not only to divide the day from the night, but
also to be for signs [59] and for seasons, [60] and for days [61] and
for years; [62] so he ordained in the church on earth, the holy Sabbath
to be not only the appointed season for his solemn worship, but also
the perpetual rule and measure of time. So that as seven days make a
week, four weeks a month, twelve months a year; so seven years make a
Sabbath of years; seven Sabbaths of years make a jubilee; eighty
jubilees, or four thousand years, or, after Ezekiel, four thousand
cubits, the whole time of the Old Testament, till Christ by his baptism
and preaching began the state of the New Testament. Neither can I here
pass over without admiration, how the sacrament of circumcision
continued in the church thirty-nine jubilees from Abraham, to whom it
was first given, until the baptism of Christ in Jordan; which was just
so many jubilees (after Bucholcers's account) as the world had
continued before from Adam to the birth of Abraham. Moses began his
ministry in the eightieth year of his age: Christ enters upon his
office in the eightieth jubilee of the world's age. Joseph was thirty
years old when he began to rule over Egypt (Gen. iv. 1, 46), and the
Levites began to serve in the tabernacle at thirty years old: so Christ
likewise, to answer these figures, began his ministry in the thirtieth
jubilee of Moses, and when he began to be thirty years of age (Luke
iii. 23) in the midst of Daniel's last week; and so (continuing his
ministry on earth three years and a half) finished our redemption and
Daniel's period, by his innocent death upon the cross. The most of all
the great alterations and strange accidents which fell out in the
church, came to pass either in a sabbatical year, or in a year of
jubilee. For example:--

The seventy weeks of Daniel, beginning the first year of Cyrus, and the
3439th year of the world, contain so many years as the world did weeks
of years until that time, and so many weeks of years as the world had
lasted jubilees. Daniel's seventy weeks of years contain four hundred
and ninety single years; the world before that time four hundred and
ninety weeks or Sabbaths of years; Daniel's period seventy weeks, the
world's seventy jubilees: so that, to comfort the church for their
seventy years' captivity, which they had now, according to Jeremiah's
prophecy, endured in Babylon (Jer. xxv. 11, 12), Gabriel tells Daniel,
that at the end of seventy weeks or Sabbaths of years, that is, seventy
times seven years, or four hundred and ninety years, their eternal
redemption from hell should be effected by the death of Christ, as sure
as they were now redeemed from the captivity of Babylon. This period of
Daniel, containing seventy Sabbaths or ten jubilees of years, began at
the first liberty granted the Jews by Cyrus, in the first year of his
reign over the Babylonians, mentioned Ezra i. 1, and ends just at the
time that Christ died upon the cross. From the death of Christ, or the
last end of Daniel's weeks, to the seventy and one year of Christ, the
world is measured by seven seals (Rev. v. 1), or seven Sabbaths of
years, making one complete jubilee. From the end of those seven seals,
the world is measured to its end by seven trumpets (Rev. viii. 2; ix.
7), each containing two hundred and forty years (as some conjecture,
about four hundred and forty years hence the truth will appear.) Enoch,
the seventh from Adam, having lived so many years as there are days in
the year, three hundred and sixty-five, was translated of God in a
sabbatical year. Moses, the seventh from Abraham, as another Enoch, is
buried of God, but born in a sabbatical year of the world, two thousand
three hundred and seventy-seventh year since the flood (according to
Broughton's computation, A.M. 1430. Deut. xxx. 4), is saved, as a new
Noah, in a reed-ark, and lived builder of the church so long as Noah
was building the ark, one hundred and twenty years. The promise was
made to Abraham in a sabbatical year, being the two thousand and
twenty-third year of the world. The sixth year of Joshua, being two
thousand five hundred years from the creation of the world, wherein the
land was possessed, and divided among the children of Israel, was a
sabbatical year, and the fiftieth jubilee from the creation of the
world. At this year Moses begins his jubilee, by which, as with a chain
of thirty links, he tieth the parting of Canaan's possession to the
Israelites by Joshua to the opening of the kingdom of heaven to all
believers by Jesus. And so carries the church of the Jews, by a joyful
stream of jubilees, [63] from the type to the substance, from Canaan to
heaven, from Joshua to Jesus: For Christ, at the end of Moses's thirty
jubilees, and the beginning of the thirtieth year of his age, at his
baptism openeth heaven, and gives the clearest vision of the blessed
Trinity that was seen since the world began; and by the silver trumpet
of his gospel proclaims, according to the prophecy of Isaiah, eternal
redemption to all that repent and believe in him (Isa. lxi. 1; Luke iv.
18.)

And the year of our Saviour Christ's birth, being the three thousand
nine hundred and forty-eighth of the world, was at the end of a
sabbatical year, and the five hundred and sixty-fourth septenary of the
world. Moses makes the common age of all men to be ten times seven
(Psal. xc), and every seventh year commonly produces some notable
change or accident in man's life: and no wonder; for, as Hippocrates
affirms, a child in his mother's womb, on the seventh day of his
conception, has all his members finished, and from that day grows to
the perfection of birth, which is always either the ninth or seventh
month. At seven years old, the child casts his teeth, and receives new.
And every seventh year after, there is some alteration or change in
man's life, especially at nine times seven, the climacteric year, which
by experience is found to have been fatal to many of those learned men
who have been the chiefest lights of the world; [64] and if they
escaped that year, yet most of them have departed this life in a
septenary year. Lamech died in the year of his life seven hundred and
seventy-seven. Methusalem, the longest liver of the sons of men, died
when he began to enter his nine hundred and seventieth year. Abraham
died when he had lived twenty-five times seven years; Jacob when he had
lived twenty-one times seven years; David, after he had lived ten times
seven years. So did Galen, so did Petrarch, who (as Bodin notes) died
on the same day of the year that he was born: so did Queen Elizabeth,
of blessed memory. Hippocrates died in the fifteenth septenary; Hierom
and Isocrates in their thirteenth; Pliny, Bartolus, and Caesar, in
their eighth septenary; and Johannes de temporibus, who lived three
hundred and sixty-one years, died in the fifty-third septenary of his
life. The like might be observed of innumerable others. And, indeed,
the whole life of a man is measured by the Sabbath; for how many years
soever a man lives here, yet his life is but a life of seven days
multiplied: so that in the number of seven there is a mystical
perfection, to which our understanding cannot attain.

All which divine disposition of admirable things, so oft by sevens,
calls upon us to a continual meditation of the blessed seventh day
Sabbath, in knowing and worshipping God in this life; that so from
Sabbath to Sabbath, we may be translated to the eternal glorious
Sabbath of rest and bliss in the life which is to come.

By which consideration any man that looks into the holy history may
easily perceive, that the whole course of the world is drawn and guided
by a certain chain of God's providence, disposing all things in number,
measure, and weight. All times are therefore measured by the Sabbath:
so that time and the Sabbath can never be separated. And the angel
swears that this measure of time shall continue till time shall be no
more (Rev. x. 6.) And as the Sabbath had its first institution in the
first book of the Scriptures, so has it its confirmation in the last;
and as this book authorizes this day, so this day graces the book: in
that the matter thereof was revealed upon so holy a day--the Lord's
revelation upon the Lord's day (Rev. i. 10.) As well, therefore, may
they pull the sun, moon, and stars, out of the heavens, as abolish the
holy Sabbath, time's mete-rod, out of the church; seeing the Sabbath is
ordained in the church, as well as the sun and moon in the firmament,
for the distinction of times.

8. Because that the whole church, by an universal consent, ever since
the time of the apostles, have still held the commandment of the
Sabbath to be the moral and perpetual law of God, and the keeping of
the Sabbath on the first day of the week to be the institution of
Christ and his apostles.

The synod called Synodus Coloniensis saith, that the Lord's day hath
been famous in the church ever since the apostles' time. Ignatius,
Bishop of Antioch, living in St. John's time, saith, "Let every one
that loveth Christ keep holy the Lord's day, renowned by his
resurrection, which is the queen of days, in which death is overcome
and life is sprung up in Christ." Justin Martyr, who lived not long
after him, shews that the Christians kept their Sabbath on the Lord's
day, as we do. Origen, who lived about one hundred and eighty years
after Christ, shews the reason why the Sabbath is translated to the
Lord's day. Augustine saith, "That the Lord's day was declared unto the
church by the resurrection of the Lord upon that day: Et ex illo coepit
habere festivitatem suam; and by Christ it was first ordained to be
kept holy." And in another place, "That the apostles appointed the
Lord's day to be kept with all religious solemnity, because that upon
that day our Redeemer rose from the dead, which also is therefore
called the Lord's day."

As, therefore, David said of the city of God (Psal. lxxxvii. 3), so may
I say of the Lord's day, "Glorious things are spoken of the day of the
Lord;" for it was the birthday of the world--the first day in which all
creatures began to have being. In it light was given out of darkness.
In it the law was given on Mount Sinai. In it the Lord rose from death
to life. In it the saints came out of their graves (Matt. xxvii. 52),
assuring that on it Christians should rise to newness of life. In it
the Holy Ghost descended upon the apostles. And it is very probable
that on the seventh day, when the seven trumpets have blown (Rev. x.
7). the cursed Jericho of this world shall fall (Josh. vi. 13), and our
true Jesus shall give us the promised possession of the heavenly
Canaan.

He that would see the uniform consent of antiquity, and practice of the
primitive church in this point, let him read Eusebius's Ecclesiastical
History, lib. 4. cap. 23; Tertullian, lib. de Idololatria, cap. 14;
Chrys. Serm. 5. de Resurrectione Constitut.; Apol. l. cap. 37; Cyril in
Johan. l. 12, c. 58. Of this judgment are all the sound new writers;
see Fox on Rev. i. 10; Bucer in Matt. xii. 11; Gualt. in Malach. iii.
hom. 23; Fulke on the Rhemish Testament, Apoc. i. 10; Chem. Exam. Cone.
Trid. par. 4. de Diebus Festis; Wolph. Chron. lib. 2. cap. 1; and
innumerable others. Learned Junius shall speak for all--"Quamobrem cum
dies dominicus," &c.--" Wherefore seeing the Lord's day is both by the
fact of Christ (viz. his resurrection and often appearing to his
disciples upon that day), by the example and institution of the
apostles, and by the continual practice of the ancient church, and by
the testimony of Scripture, observed and substituted into the place of
the Jewish Sabbath, Ineptè faciunt, they do foolishly who say that the
observation of the Lord's day is of tradition and not from the
Scripture, that by this means they might establish the traditions of
men." And again, "The cause of this change is the resurrection of
Christ, and the benefit of the restoring of the church by Christ, the
remembrance of which benefit did succeed into the place of the memory
of the creation. Non humana traditione, sed Christi ipsius observatione
et instituto: Not by the tradition of man, but by the observation and
appointment of Christ, who both on the day of his resurrection and on
every eighth day after, until his ascension into heaven, did appear
unto his disciples and came into their assemblies."

9. Because that the Lord himself expounded the end of the Sabbath, to
be a sign and document for ever, between him and his people, that he is
Jehovah, by whom they are sanctified (Exod. xxxi. 13, 14, &c.; Ezek.
xx. 12, 20), and therefore must only of them be worshipped (Ezek. xlvi.
1, 2, 3, &c.;) and upon the pain of death, charges his people for ever
to keep this memorial unviolated (Exod. xxxv. 2.) But this end is moral
and perpetual; what God hath perpetually sanctified, let no man ever
presume to make common or profane (Acts x. 15.) Upon this ground it is,
that the commandment terms this day, the Sabbath of the Lord thy God.
And God himself calls it his holy day (Isa. lviii. 13.) And upon the
same ground likewise the Old Testament consecrated all their Sabbaths
and holy days to the worship and honour of God alone. To dedicate,
therefore, a Sabbath to the honour of any creature, is gross idolatry.
For the first table makes it a part of God's worship to have a Sabbath
to his honour; so doth Lev. xxiii. 3, 37, 38, &c.; and Ezek. xx. 20;
Neh. ix. 14; the Sabbath is put for the whole worship of God. And our
Saviour teaches, that we must worship the Lord God only, Matt. iv. 10;
and therefore keep a Sabbath to the only honour of God. The Holy Ghost
notes it as one of Jereboam's greatest sins, that he ordained a feast
from the device of his own heart, 1 Kings xii. 33. And God threatened
to visit Israel for keeping the days of Baalim; that is, of lords, as
papists do of saints, Hos. ii. 13; but saith, that such forget him. And
so, indeed, none are less careful in keeping the Lord's Sabbath, than
they who are most superstitious observers of men's holy days. The
Church of Rome therefore commits gross idolatry--First, in taking upon
her to ordain Sabbaths, which belongs only unto the Lord of the Sabbath
to do; Secondly, in dedicating those holy days to the honour of
creatures, which in effect is to make them sanctifying gods; Thirdly,
in tying to these days, God's worship, prayers, fasting, and merit;
Fourthly, in exacting on these days of men's invention, a greater
measure of solemnity and sanctification, than upon the Lord's day,
which is God's commandment: which in effect is to prefer antichrist
before Christ. Our church hath justly abolished all superstitious and
idolatrous feasts; and only retains a few holydays to the honour of God
alone, and easing of servants, Deut. v. 14; though long custom forces
to use the old names, for civil distinction; as Luke used the profane
names of Castor and Pollux, Acts xxviii. 11; and Christians of
Fortunatus, 1 Cor. xvi. 17; Mercurius, [65] Rom. xvi. 14; and Jews of
Mardocheus' day, 2 Mac. xv. 36.

10. Lastly, the examples of God's judgments on Sabbath-breakers, may
sufficiently seal to them whose hearts are not seared, how wrathfully
Almighty God is displeased with them who are wilful profaners of the
Lord's day.

The Lord, who is otherwise the God of mercy, commanded Moses to stone
to death the man who, of a presumptuous mind, would openly go to gather
sticks on the Sabbath day (Num. xv. 32.) The fact was small: true, but
his sin was the greater, that, for so small an occasion, he would
presume to break so great a commandment.

Nicanor, offering to fight against the Jews on the Sabbath day, was
slain himself, and 35,000 of his men (2 Mac. viii. 21.)

A husbandman grinding corn upon the Lord's day, had his mill burned to
ashes. [66]

Another, carrying corn on this day, had his barn, and all his corn
therein, burnt with fire from heaven the next night after. [67]

Also a certain nobleman profaning the Sabbath, usually in hunting, had
a child by his wife with a head like a dog, with ears and chaps, and
which cried like a hound. [68]

A covetous flax-woman at Kingstat in France, anno 1559, using with her
maids to work at her trade on the Lord's day, it seemed to them that
fire issued out of the flax, but did no harm: the next Sabbath it took
fire indeed, but was quickly quenched; but not taking warning by this,
the third Sunday after it took fire again, burnt the house, and so
scorched the wretched woman, with two of her children, that they died
the next day; but through God's mercy, a child in the cradle was taken
out of the fire alive and unhurt. [69]

On the 13th of January, anno dom. 1582, being the Lord's day, the
scaffolds fell, in Paris garden, under the people, at a bear-baiting,
so that eight were suddenly slain, innumerable hurt and maimed: A
warning to such, who take more pleasure on the Lord's day to be in a
theatre, beholding carnal sports, than to be in the church serving God
with the spiritual works of piety. [70]

Many fearful examples of God's judgments by fire, have in our days been
shewed upon divers towns, where the profanation of the Lord's day hath
been openly countenanced.

Stratford-upon-Avon was. twice on the same day twelvemonth, being the
Lord's day, almost consumed with fire; chiefly for profaning the Lord's
Sabbaths, and for contemning his word in the mouth of his faithful
ministers.

Teverton, in Devonshire (whose remembrance makes my heart bleed) was
oftentimes admonished by her godly preacher that God would bring some
heavy judgment on the town for their horrible profanation of the Lord's
day, occasioned chiefly by their market on the day following. [71] Not
long after his death, on the third of April 1598, God, in less than
half an hour, consumed, with a sudden and fearful fire, the whole town,
except only the church, the court-house, and the alms-houses, or a few
poor people's dwellings; where a man might have seen four hundred
dwelling-houses all at once on fire, and above fifty persons consumed
with the flames. And now again, since the former edition of this book,
on the fifth of August last, 1612 (fourteen years since the former
fire), the whole town was again fired, and consumed, except some thirty
houses of poor people, with the school-house and alms-houses. They are
blind who see not in this the finger of God. God grant them grace, when
it is next built, to change their market-day, and to remove all
occasions of profaning the Lord's day. Let other towns remember the
tower of Siloam (Luke xiii. 4), and take warning by their neighbours'
chastisements, fear God's threatening (Jer. xvii. 27), and believe
God's prophets, if they will prosper (2 Chron. xx. 20.)

Many other examples of God's judgments might be alleged; but if these
are not sufficient to terrify thy heart from the wilful profanation of
the Lord's day, proceed in thy profanation; it may be, the Lord will
make thee the next example, to teach others to keep his Sabbaths
better.

He punishes some in this life, to signify how he will plague all wilful
transgressors of his Sabbaths at the last day.

Thus we have proved that the commandment of the Sabbath is moral, and
that the change of it from the seventh to the first day of the week was
instituted by the authority of Christ and of his apostles. But as, in
promulgating the law, divers ceremonies peculiar to the Jews were
annexed, the rather to bind that people to the more careful performance
thereof: as to the first commandment, their deliverance from Egypt,
shadowing their redemption from hell; to the fifth commandment, length
of days in Canaan, typifying eternal life in heaven; to the sixth
commandment, abstaining from blood and things strangled, figuring the
care to abstain from all kind of murder; and to the whole law, the
ceremony of parchment lace (Numb. xv. 38), putting them in mind to keep
within the limits of the law: So likewise to the fourth commandment
were added some ceremonies which peculiarly belonged to the Jews, and
to no other people; as, First, the double sacrifices appointed for them
on the Sabbath day (Num. xxviii. 9, 10), shadowing how God will be
served on the Sabbath with greater obedience than on the week days:
Secondly, the rigid and strict ceasing from making of fire (Exod. xxxv.
2, 3), dressing of meat (Exod. xvi. 23), and all bodily labour, both
remembering them of their full deliverance by Moses's conduct from the
fiery furnaces, and slavery of Egypt, upon that day (Deut. v. 16), [72]
as also shadowing to them the eternal redemption of their souls from
hell by the death of Christ: Thirdly, the keeping of the Sabbath upon
the precise seventh day in order of the creation; shadowing to the Jews
that Christ by his death, and resting on their Sabbath in the grave,
should bring them rest and ease from the burden and yoke of the legal
ceremonies, which neither they nor their fathers were able to bear
(Acts xv. 10; Col. ii. 16, 17.)

And howsoever in Paradise, before man's fall, the keeping of the
Sabbath on the seventh day of the creation was not a ceremony, but an
argument of perfection: yet after the fall it became ceremonial, and
subject to change, in respect of the restoration by Christ: As man's
life, before the fall, being immortal, became afterwards mortal; and
nakedness, being an ornament before, became afterwards a shame; and
marriage became a type of the mystical union between Christ and his
church (Ephes. v.) And to fulfil, the ceremonies added, for the Jews'
sake, to the Sabbath, Christ at his death rested in the grave all the
Jewish Sabbath day, and by that rest fulfilled all those ceremonial
accessories. Now, as the ceasing of the ceremonies annexed to the
first, fifth, and sixth commandments, and to marriage, did not abolish
those commandments and marriage, nor cause them to cease from being the
perpetual rules of God's worship and man's righteousness, no more did
the abrogation of the ceremonies annexed to the Sabbath abolish the
morality of the commandment of the Sabbath: so that, though the
ceremonies be abolished by the access of the substance, and the shadow
overshadowed by the body, which is Christ; yet the holy rest which was
commanded and kept before either the Jews were a people, or those
ceremonies annexed to the Sabbath, still continues as God's perpetual
law, whereby all the posterity of Adam are bound to rest from their
ordinary business, that they may wholly spend every seventh day in the
solemn worship and only service of God, their Creator and Redeemer; but
in the substance of the fourth commandment there is not found one word
of any ceremony.

The chief objections against the morality of the Sabbath are three:--

Obj. ]. That of Paul to the Galatians: "Ye observe days, and months,
and times, and years," &c. (Gal. iv. 10.) But there the apostle
condemns not the moral Sabbath (which we call the Lord's day, and which
he himself ordained, according to Christ's commandment, in the same
churches of Galatia and Corinth, and kept himself in other churches, 1
Cor. xvi. 2; xiv. 37; Acts xx. 7;) but he speaks of the Jewish days,
and times, and years, and the keeping of the Sabbath on the seventh day
from the creation, which he terms "shadows of things to come" (Col. ii.
17), abolished now by Christ the body; and in the law are called
Sabbaths (Lev. xxiii. 37, 38), but distinguished from the moral
Sabbaths.

Obj. 2. That of Paul to the Colossians: "Let no man therefore condemn
you in meat or drink, or in respect of an holy-day, or of the new moon,
or of the Sabbath-days" (Col. ii. 16.) But here the apostle means the
Jewish ceremonial Sabbaths, not the Christians' Lord's day, as before.

Obj. 3. That of the same apostle to the Romans: "This man esteemeth one
day above another day, and another counteth every day alike," &c. (Rom.
xiv. 5.) But St. Paul makes no such account. For the question there is
not between Jews and Gentiles, but between the stronger and weaker
Christians (Rom. xv. 1.) The stronger esteemed one day above another,
as appears, in that there was a day both commanded and received in the
church, everywhere known and honoured by the name of the Lord's day.
And therefore Paul saith here, that he that observed this day, observed
it unto the Lord; the observation whereof, because of the change of the
Jewish seventh day, some weak Christians (as many now a-days) thought
not so necessary: so that if men, because me Jewish day is abrogated,
will not honour and keep holy the Lord's day, but count it like other
days, it is an argument, saith the apostle, of their weakness, whose
infirmity must be borne till they have time to be further instructed
and persuaded. Other objections are frivolous, and not worth the
answering.

[57] Euseb. Hist. Eccl. 1. iii. c. 5--It is probable that this oracle
was that voice (migremus hinc) which, with an earthquake, was heard by
night in the temple, mentioned by Josephus, de Bello Judaico, lib. vii.
c. 12.

[58] Nitimur in vetitum.--Ovid.

[59] To distinguish between spring and harvest, summer and winter, and
to foreshew judgments to come.

[60] Moadim sig. Sacred times appointed for God's holy worship, having
special significations and promises.

[61] One of the seven days of the week from the other.

[62] Solar, Sabbatarian, and jubilee (Exod. xiii. 11, 12.)

[63] Jubilee some derive of trumpets or rams'-horns, wherewith the
jubilee was sounded; others from jubal, a stream, because they carry us
to the death of Christ, the author of our eternal rest and joy.

[64] Aristotle, Cicero, Bernard, Bocace, Erasmus, Luther, Melancthon,
Sturmius.

[65] Hermes.

[66] Cent. Magdeb. xii. c. 6.

[67] Disp. de Tempore, Ser. 117.

[68] Tho. Cantiprat. lib. ii. de apid. Timpii. admiran vindict. div.
Thea. Hist.

[69] Johan. Finc. lib. iii. De Miraculis.

[70] Stow's Abridgment, An. 1582. Disciti jam moniti Dominumn non
temnere Christum.

[71] While the preachers cried in the church, Profaneness! profaneness!
gain would not suffer them to hear: therefore, when they cried Fire!
fire! in the street, God would not suffer any to help.

[72] It was the Sabbath-day on which Moses and the children of Israel
sang to God, when Pharaoh and his host were drowned in the sea (Exod.
xv.)--See Trem. & Jun. Notes on Deut. v. 15, and on Exod. xii. 15.

[51] Cyril bids us note, that St. John doth not simply set down the
manner of Christ's appearing to Thomas, but also the circumstance of
the time (post dies octo), whence he concludes thus: Diem igitur
octavum Dominicam diem esse necesse est.--Cyril in Johan. lib. xii.
cap. 58.

[52] Athan. in frontispicio hom. de sent.

[53] The Scripture of the New Testament gives not this honourable title
to anything but only to the blessed Sabbath and holy Supper: For as he
substituted the Lord's Supper instead of the Passover, so did he the
Lord's day in the Jewish Sabbath's room.

[54] Legis substantia est sex diebus, terrenis negotiis incumbere;
septimâ, divino cultui dare operam.

[55] The Syriac, translation hath, "Quum congregamini, non, sicut
justum est, in die Domini nostri comeditis et bibitis." The Arabian
translation also hath thus: "Non comeditis et bibitis prout verè diebus
Domini nostri dicet." And Beza witnesses, that in one ancient Greek
copy there is read, ten kuriaken, the Lord's day, added to every first
day, &c.

[56] As the phrase of "breaking of bread" comprehends all other
exercises of religion (Acts xx. 7;) so this phrase of "laying by in
store" comprehends all the other exercises of the Sabbath: And why
should the apostle require the collections to be made on the first day
of the week, but because that on this day the holy assembly was held in
the apostles' time?

## The True Manner of Keeping Holy the Lord's Day.

Now the sanctifying of the Sabbath consists in two things--First, In
resting from all servile and common business pertaining to our natural
life; Secondly, In consecrating that rest wholly to the service of God,
and the use of those holy means which belong to our spiritual life.

For the First.

1. The servile and common works from which we are to cease are,
generally, all civil works, from the least to the greatest (Exod. xxxi.
12, 13, 15, &c.) More particularly--

First, From all the works of our calling, though it were reaping in
time of harvest (Exod. xxxiv. 21.)

Secondly, From carrying burdens, as carriers do (Neh. xiii. 15; Jer.
xvii. 21, 22, 27;) or riding abroad for profit or for pleasure. God
hath commanded that the beasts should rest on the Sabbath day, because
all occasions of travelling or labouring with them should be cut off
from man. God gives them that day a rest (Deut. v. 14;) and he that
without necessity deprives them of their rest on the Lord's day, the
groans of the poor tired beasts shall in the day of the Lord rise up in
judgment against him (Rom. viii. 22; Deut. xxv. 4; 1 Cor. ix. 9.)
Likewise such as spend the greatest part of this day in trimming,
painting, and pampering of themselves, like Jezebels, do the devil's
work upon God's day.

Thirdly, From keeping of fairs or markets (Neh. xiii. 15, 16, 19;)
which for the most part God punishes with pestilence, fire, and strange
floods.

Fourthly, From studying any books of science but the holy Scriptures
and divinity: for our study must be to be ravished in spirit upon the
Lord's day (Rev. i. 10.) In a word, thou must on that day cease in thy
calling- to do thy work, that the Lord by his calling may do his work
in thee: for whatsoever is gotten by common working on this day shall
never be blessed of the Lord; but it will prove like Achan's gold,
which being got contrary to the Lord's commandment, brought the fire of
God's curse upon all the rest which he had lawfully gotten. And if
Christ scourged them out as thieves who bought and sold in his temple,
which was but a ceremony shortly to be abrogated, is it to be thought
that he will ever suffer those to escape unpunished who, contrary to
his commandment, buy and sell on the Sabbath day, which is his
perpetual law? Christ calleth such, sacrilegious thieves; and as well
may they steal the communion cup from the Lord's table, as steal from
God the chiefest part of the Lord's day to consume it in their own
lusts. Such shall one day find the judgments of God heavier than the
opinions of men.

Fifthly, From, all recreations and sports, which at some other times
are lawful: for if lawful works be forbidden on this day, much more
lawful sports; which do more steal away our affections from the
contemplation of heavenly things (Isa. lix. 13, 14), than any bodily
work or labour. Neither can there be to a man that delighteth in the
Lord (Psal. xxxvii. 4), any greater delight or recreation than the
sanctifying of the Lord's day. For can there be any greater joy for a
person condemned than to come to his prince's house to have his pardon
sealed?--for one that is deadly sick to come to a physician that can
cure him?--or for a prodigal child that fed on the husks of swine to be
admitted to eat the bread of life at his father's table?--or for him
who fears for sin the tidings of death, to come to hear from God the
assurance of eternal life? If thou wilt allow thyself or thy servants
recreation, allow it in the six days which are thine, not on the Lord's
day, which is neither thine nor theirs. No bodily recreation,
therefore, is to be used on this day, but so far as it may help the
soul to do more cheerfully the service of God.

Sixthly, From gross feeding, liberal drinking of wine or strong drink
(Eph. v. 18, 19), which may make us either drowsy or unapt to serve God
with our hearts and minds (Rom. xii. 11; Deut. xxviii. 47.)

Seventhly, From all talking about worldly things, which hindereth the
sanctifying of the Sabbath more than working: seeing one may work
alone, but cannot talk but with others.

He that keeps the Sabbath only by resting from his ordinary work, keeps
it but as a beast. But rest on this day is so far commanded to
Christians, as it is an help to sanctification; and labour so far
forbidden, as it is an impediment to the outward and inward worship of
God.

If, then, those recreations which are lawful at other times, are on the
Sabbath not allowed; much more those that are altogether at all times
unlawful. Who without mourning can endure to see Christians keep the
Lord's day, as if they celebrated a feast rather to Bacchus, than to
the honour of the Lord Jesus, the Saviour and Redeemer of the world?
For, having served God but an hour in outward shew, they spend the rest
of the Lord's day in sitting down to eat and drink, and rising up to
play; first ballasting their bellies with eating and drinking, and then
feeding their lusts with playing and dancing (1 Cor. x. 7; Exod. xxxii.
6, 18, 19.) Against which profanations all holy divines, both old and
new, have in their times most bitterly inveighed: insomuch, that
Augustine affirms, "that it was better to plough than to dance on the
Sabbath day."

Now in the names of Almighty God, who rested, having created heaven and
earth, and of his eternal Son Jesus, the Redeemer of his church, who
shall shortly come, on the dreadful day of doom, to judge all men
according to the obedience which they have shewed to his commandments
(Acts xvii. 31; Rom. ii. 12, &c.; 2 Thess. ii. 8, &c), I require thee
who readest these words, as thou wilt answer before the face of Christ
and all his holy angels at that day, that thou better weigh and
consider whether dancing, stage-playing, masking, carding, dicing,
tabling, chess-playing, bowling, shooting, bear-baiting, carousing,
tippling, and such other fooleries of Robin Hood, morrice-dances,
wakes, and May-games, be exercises that God will bless and allow on the
Sabbath day. And seeing that no action ought to be done that day, but
such as whereby we either bless God, or look to receive a blessing from
God; how darest thou do those things on that blessed day, on which thou
darest not to pray to God to bestow a blessing on it to thy use? Hear
this and tremble at this, O profane youth of a profane age!

O heart all frozen and void of the feeling of the grace of God! that
having every day in six--every hour in every day--every minute in every
hour, so tasted the sweet mercy of thy God in Christ, without which
thou hadst perished every moment; yet canst not find in thy corrupt and
irreligious heart to spend in thy Master's service that one day of the
week, which he hath reserved for his own praise and worship. Let men in
defence of their profaneness object what they will, and answer what the
devil puts in their mouths, yet I could wish them to remember, that
seeing it is an ancient tradition in the church that the Lord's second
coming shall be upon the Lord's day, [73] how little joy they should
have to be overtaken in those carnal sports, to please themselves, when
their Master should find them in spiritual exercises serving him: the
profanest wretch would then wish rather to be taken kneeling at prayers
in the church, than skipping like a goat in a dance. If this cannot
move, yet I would wish our impure gallants to remember, that whilst
they thus amuse themselves on the Lord's day, contrary to the Lord's
commandment, they do but dance about the pit's brink, and they know not
which of them shall first fall therein: into which being once fallen
without repentance, no greatness can exempt them from the vengeance of
that great God, whose commandment, contrary to their knowledge and
conscience, they do thus presumptuously transgress. If, then, God's
commandment cannot deter thee, nor God's word advise thee, I say no
more but what St. John said before me, "He which is filthy let him be
filthy still." [74]

For the Second.

2. The consecration of the Sabbath's rest consists in performing three
sorts of duties:--First, Before; Secondly, At; Thirdly, After, the
public exercises of the church.

The Duties to be performed before the Public Exercises, are--

1. To give over working betimes on the eve, that thy body may be the
more refreshed, and thy mind the better fitted to sanctify the Sabbath
on the next day. For want of this preparation, thyself and thy servants
being tired with labour and watching the night before, are so heavy,
that when you should be serving God, and hearing what his Spirit saith
unto the church for your souls' instruction, you cannot hold up your
heads for sleeping; to the dishonour of God, the offence of the church,
and the shame of yourselves: therefore the Lord commands us not only to
keep holy, but also to remember beforehand" the Sabbath day--to keep it
holy, by preparing our hearts, and removing all business that might
hinder us to consecrate it as a glorious day unto the Lord (Isa. lvi.
2, &c.; lviii. 13, &c.) Therefore whereas the Lord, in the other
commandments, does but either bid or forbid, he does both in this
commandment, and that with a special memorandum: As if a Master should
charge his servant to look well unto ten things of great trust, but to
have a more special care to remember one of those ten, for divers
weighty reasons; should not a faithful servant, that loves his master,
shew a more special care unto that thing above all other businesses?

Thus Moses taught the people over night to remember the Sabbath (Exod.
xvi. 23, &c.) And it was a holy custom among our forefathers, when, at
the ringing to prayer on the eve before, the husbandman would give over
his labour in the field, and the tradesman his work in the shop, and go
to evening prayer in the church, to prepare their souls; that their
minds might more cheerfully attend God's worship on the Sabbath day.

2. To rise up early in the morning on the Sabbath day. Be careful,
therefore, to rise sooner on this day than on other days: by how much
the service of God is to be preferred before all earthly business. For
there is no master to serve so good as God; and in the end, no work
shall be better rewarded than his service.

3. When thou art up, consider with thyself what an impure sinner thou
art, and into what an holy place thou goest to appear, before the most
holy God, who seeth thy heart, and hateth all impurity and hypocrisy.
Examine thyself, therefore, before thou goest to Church, what grievous
sins thou hast committed the week past; confess them to God, and
earnestly pray for the pardon and forgiveness of them, and so reconcile
thyself with God in Christ. Renew thy vows to walk more conscionably,
and pray for an increase of those graces which thou hast, and a supply
of those which thou wantest. But especially pray that thou mayest have
grace to hear the word of God read and preached with profit; and that
thou mayest receive the holy sacrament with comfort, if it be communion
day; that God by his Holy Spirit would assist the preacher to speak
something that may kill thy sin, and comfort thy soul;--which thou
mayest do in this or the like sort:--

[73] Lactan. I. 7, c. l.

[74] This was the last and heaviest curse that St. John wished
spiritual Babylon.
