<p>
  <a class="prev" href="17.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="19.html">Next</a>
</p>

## A Morning Prayer for the Sabbath-day.

O Lord most high, O God eternal, all whose worka are glorious, and
whose thoughts are very deep: there can be no better thing, than to
praise thy name, and to declare thy loving-kindness in the morning, on
thy holy and blessed Sabbath day! For it is thy will and commandment,
that we should sanctify this day in thy service and praise: and in the
thankful remembrance, as of the creation of the world by the power of
thy word; so of the redemption of mankind by the death of thy Son.
Thine, O Lord, I confess, is greatness and power, and glory and
victory, and praise; for all that is in heaven and earth is thine:
thine is the kingdom, O Lord, and thou excellest as head over all. Both
riches and honour come of thee, and thou reignest over all, and in
thine hand is power and strength; and in thine hand it is to make
great, and to give grace unto all. Now, therefore, O my God, I praise
thy glorious name, that whereas I, a wretched sinner, having so many
ways provoked thy majesty to anger and displeasure; thou,
notwithstanding, of thy favour and goodness, passing by my profaneness.
and infirmities, hast vouchsafed to add this Sabbath again to the
number of my days. And vouchsafe, O heavenly Father, for the merits of
Jesus Christ thy Son, whose glorious resurrection thy whole church
celebrateth this day, to pardon and forgive me all my sins and
misdeeds. Especially, O Lord--[Here thou mayest confess whatsoever sin
of the last week clogs thy conscience]--cleanse my soul from those
filthy sins, with the blood of thy most pure and undefiled Lamb, which
taketh away the sins of the world. And let thy Holy Spirit more and
more subdue my corruptions, that I may be renewed after thy own image,
to serve thee in newness of life, and holiness of conversation. And as
of thy mercy thou hast brought me to the beginning of this blessed day;
so I beseech thee make it a day of reconciliation between my sinful
soul and thy divine majesty. Give me grace to make it a day of
repentance unto thee, that thy goodness may seal it to be a day of
pardon unto me; and that I may remember that the keeping holy of this
day is a commandment which thy own finger hath written; that on this
day I might meditate on the glorious works of our creation and
redemption, and learn how to know and keep all the rest of thy holy
laws and commandments. And when anon, I shall, with the rest of the
holy assembly, appear before thy presence in thy house, to offer unto
thee our morning sacrifice of praise and prayer, and to hear what thy
Spirit, by the preaching of thy word, shall speak unto thy servant, O
let not my sins stand as a cloud to stop my prayers from ascending unto
thee, or to keep back thy grace from descending by thy word into my
heart. I know, O Lord, and tremble to think, that three parts of the
good seed falls upon bad ground. O let not my heart be like the
highway, which through hardness, and want of true understanding,
receives not the seed, till the evil one cometh and catcheth it away:
nor like to the stony ground, which heareth with joy for a time, but
falleth away as soon as persecution ariseth for the Gospel's sake: nor
like the thorny ground, which by the cares of this world, and the
deceitfulness of riches, choketh the word which it heareth, and makes
it altogether unfruitful; but that like unto the good ground, I may
hear thy word, with an honest and good heart understand it, and keep
it, and bring forth fruit with patience, in that measure that thy
wisdom shall think meet for thy glory, and mine everlasting comfort.
Open likewise, I beseech thee, O Lord, the door of utterance unto thy
faithful servant, whom thou hast sent unto us to open our eyes, that we
may turn from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God:
that we may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them
which are sanctified by faith in Christ. And give me grace to submit
myself unto his ministry, as well when he terrifieth me with judgments,
as when he comforteth me with thy mercies; and that I may have him in
singular love for his works' sake; because he watcheth for my soul as
he that must give an account for the same unto his master. And give me
grace to behave myself in the holy congregation with comeliness and
reverence, as in thy presence, and in the sight of thy holy angels:
keep me from drowsiness and sleeping, and from all wandering thoughts,
and worldly imaginations. Sanctify my memory, that it may be apt to
receive, and firm to remember, those good and profitable doctrines
which shall be taught unto us out of thy word. And that through the
assistance of thy Holy Spirit, I may put the same lessons in practice
for my direction in prosperity, for my consolation in misery, for the
amendment of my life, and the glory of thy name. And that this day
which godless and profane persons spend in their own lusts and
pleasures, I, as one of thy obedient servants, may make my chief
delight to consecrate to thy glory and honour, not doing mine own ways,
nor seeking mine own will, nor speaking a vain word; but that, ceasing
from the works of sin as well as from the works of my ordinary calling,
I may, through thy blessing, feel in my heart the beginning of that
eternal Sabbath, which in unspeakable joy and glory I shall celebrate
with saints and angels, to thy praise and worship, in thy heavenly
kingdom for evermore. All which I humbly crave at thy hands, in the
name and mediation of my Lord Jesus, in that form of prayer which he
hath taught me:--"Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy
name," &c.

Having thus in private prepared thy own soul, if thou hast the charge
of a family, call all thy household together, read a chapter, and pray
as in the week-days: but remember so to despatch these private
preparations and duties, as that thou and thy family may be in the
church before the beginning of prayers; else your private exercises are
rather a hindrance than a preparation. And as thou and thy household do
go in all reverence towards the church, let every one meditate thus
with himself:--

Things to be meditated on as thou goest to the Church.

1. That thou art going to the court of the Lord, and to speak with the
great God by prayer; and to hear his majesty speak unto thee by his
word; and to receive his blessing on thy soul, and thy honest labour,
in the six days past.

2. Say with thyself by the way--"As the hart brayeth for the rivers of
water, so panteth my soul after thee, O God. My soul thirsteth for God,
even for the living God: When shall I come and appear before the
presence of God? For a day in thy courts is better than a thousand
elsewhere. I had rather be a door-keeper in the house of my God, than
to dwell in the tabernacles of wickedness. Therefore I will come into
thy house in the multitude of thy mercies, and in thy fear will I
worship toward thine holy temple."

3. As thou enterest into the church, say--"How fearful is this place!
This is none other but the house of God; this is the gate of heaven.
Surely the Lord is in this place: God is in this people indeed." And
prostrating with thy face downward (1 Cor. xiv. 25), being come to thy
place, say--"O Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the
place where thy honour dwelleth: One thing, therefore, have I desired
of thee, that I will require, even that I may dwell in thy house all
the. days of my life, to behold thy beauty, and to visit thy temple:
Therefore will I offer in thy tabernacle sacrifices of joy, I will sing
and praise the Lord. Hearken unto my voice, O Lord, when I cry; have
mercy also upon me, and hear me. Doubtless, kindness and mercy shall
follow me all the days of my life, and I will dwell for ever in the
house of the Lord." And this is that preparation, or looking to our
feet, to which Solomon advises us before we enter into the house of God
(Eccl. v. 1.)

The Second sort of Duties which are to be performed at the time of the
holy Assembly.

When prayers begin, lay aside thy own private meditations, and let thy
heart join with the minister and the whole church, as being one body of
Christ (1 Cor. xii. 12;) and because that God is the God of order, he
will have all things to be done in the church with one heart and accord
(Acts ii. 46;) and the exercises of the church are common and public
(chap. iv. 32.) It is therefore an ignorant pride, for a man to think
his own private prayers more effectual than the public prayers of the
whole church. Solomon therefore advises a man not to be rash to utter a
thing in the church before God. Pray, therefore, when the church
prayeth, sing when they sing; and in the action of kneeling, standing,
sitting, and such indifferent ceremonies (for the avoiding of scandal,
the continuance of charity, and in testimony of thine obedience),
conform thyself to the manner of the church wherein thou livest (Ezek.
xlvi. 10; Psal. cx. 3.)

Whilst the preacher is expounding and applying the word of the Lord,
look upon him; for it is a great help to stir up thine attention, and
to keep thee from wandering thoughts: so the eyes of all that were in
the synagogue are said to have been fastened on Christ whilst he
preached, and that all the people hanged upon him when they heard him.
Remember that thou art there as one of Christ's disciples, to learn the
knowledge of salvation, by the remission of sins, through the tender
mercy of God (Luke i. 77.)

Be not, therefore, in the school of Christ, like an idle boy in a
grammar-school, that often hears, but never learns his lesson; and
still goes to school, but profiteth nothing. Thou hatest it in a
child--Christ detesteth it in thee. To the end, therefore, that thou
mayest the better profit by hearing, mark--

1. The coherence and explication of the text.

2. The chief sum or scope of the Holy Ghost in that text.

3. The division or parts of the text.

4. The doctrines; and in every doctrine the proofs, the reasons, and
the uses thereof.

A method, of all others, easiest for the people (being accustomed to
it), to help them to remember the sermon; and therefore all faithful
pastors, who desire to edify their people in the knowledge of God, and
in his true religion, much wish it to be put in practice.

If the preacher's method be too curious or confused, then labour to
remember--

1. How many things he taught which thou knewest not before; and be
thankful.

2. What sins he reproved, whereof thy conscience tells thee that thou
art guilty; and therefore must be amended.

3. What virtues he exhorted unto, which are not so perfect in thee; and
therefore endeavour to practise them with more zeal and diligence.

But in hearing, apply every speech as spoken to thyself, rather by God
than by man (Isa. ii. 3; Acts x. 33; Gal. iv. 14; 1 Thess. ii. 13;) and
labour not so much to hear the words of the preacher sounding in thine
ear, as to feel the operation of the Spirit working in thy heart.
Therefore it is said so often, "Let him that hath an ear hear what the
Spirit speaks to the church," (Rev. ii. 7;) and, "Did not our hearts
burn within us whilst he opened unto us the Scriptures?" (Luke xxiv.
32.) And thus to hear the word, hath a blessing promised to it (Luke
xi. 28.) It is the most acceptable sacrificing of ourselves unto God
(Rom. xv. 16.) It is the surest note of Christ's saints (Deut. xxxiii.
3;) the truest mark of Christ's sheep (John x. 4;) the most apparent
sign of God's elect (John viii. 47; xviii. 37;) the very blood, as it
were, which unites us to be the spiritual kindred, brethren and sisters
of the Son of God (Luke i. 21; Mark iii. 35.) This is the best art of
memory for a good hearer.

When the sermon is ended--

1. Beware thou depart not like the nine lepers, till, for thine
instruction to saving health, thou hast returned thanks and praise to
God by an after prayer, and singing of a psalm. And when the blessing
is pronounced, stand up to receive thy part therein, and hear it as if
Christ himself (whose minister he is) did pronounce the same unto thee:
For in this case it is true, "He that heareth you heareth me," (Luke x.
16;) and the Sabbath day is blessed, because God hath appointed it to
be the day wherein by the mouth of his ministers he will bless his
people which hear his word and glorify his name (Num. vi. 23, 27.) For
though the Sabbath day in itself be no more blessed than the other six
days, yet, because the Lord hath appointed it to holy uses above
others, it as far excels the other days of the week as the consecrated
bread which we receive at the Lord's table does the common bread which
we eat at our own table.

2. If it be a communion-day, draw near to the Lord's table in the
wedding garment of a faithful and penitent heart, to be partaker of so
holy a banquet.

And when baptism [75] is to be administered, stay and behold it with
all reverent attention, that so thou mayest--First, Shew thy reverence
to God's ordinance; Secondly, That thou mayest the better consider
thine own ingrafting into the visible body of Christ's church, and how
thou performest the vows of thy new covenant; Thirdly, That thou mayest
repay thy debts, in praying for the infant which is to be baptized (as
other Christians did in the like case for thee), that God would give
him the inward effects of baptism, by his blood and Spirit; Fourthly,
That thou mayest assist the church in praising God for grafting another
member into his mystical body; Fifthly, That thou mayest prove whether
the effects of Christ's death killeth sin in thee, and whether thou be
raised to newness of life by the virtue of his resurrection; and so to
be humbled for thy wants, and to be thankful for his graces; Sixthly,
To shew thyself to be a freeman of Christ's corporation, having a voice
or consent in the admission of others into that holy society.

If there be any collection for the poor, freely without grudging bestow
thine alms, as God hath blessed thee with ability (1 Cor. xvi. 1; 2
Cor. ix. 5, 6, 7, &c.)

And thus far of the duties to be performed in the holy assembly.

Now of the Third sort of Duties after the holy Assembly.

As thou returnest home, or when thou art entered into thy house,
meditate a little while upon those things which thou hast heard. And as
the clean beasts which chew the cud (Lev. xi. 3), so must thou bring
again to thy remembrance that which thou hast heard in the church. And
then kneeling down, turn all to prayer, beseeching God to give such a
blessing to those things which thou hast heard, that they may be a
direction to thy life, and a consolation unto thy soul (Psal. cxix.
11.) For till the word be thus made our own, and, as it were, close
hidden in our hearts, we are in danger lest Satan steal it away, and we
shall receive no profit thereby (Matt. xiii. 19.) And when thou goest
to dinner, in that reverent and thankful manner before prescribed,
remember, according to thy ability, to have one or more poor
Christians, whose hungry bowels may be refreshed with thy meat;
imitating holy Job, who protested that he did never eat his morsel
alone, without the good company of the poor and fatherless (Job xxxi.
17, 18:) that is the commandment of Christ our Master (Luke xiv. 13.)
Or at leastwise, send some part of thy dinner to the poor who lies sick
in the back-lane, without any food (Esth. ix. 22;) for this will bring
a blessing upon all thy works and labours (Deut. xv. 10, &c.;) and it
will one day more rejoice thy soul than it doth now refresh his body,
when Christ shall say unto thee, "O blessed child of God! I was an
hungered, and thou gavest me meat," &c. And, "forasmuch as thou hast
done it for my sake to the least of these my brethren, I take it in as
good part as if thou hadst done it to my own self."

When dinner is ended, and the Lord praised, call thy family together;
[76] examine what they have learned in the sermon (Acts xvii. 11; Heb.
v. 14;) commend them that do well, yet discourage not them whose
memories or capacities are weaker, but rather help them, for their
wills and minds may be as good. Turn to the proofs which the preacher
alleged, and rub those good things over their memories again (Deut. vi.
7.) Then sing a psalm or more (Matt. xxvi. 30; Jam. v. 13.) If time
permit, thou mayest teach and examine them in some part of the
catechism (Heb. vi. 1), conferring every point with the proofs of the
holy Scripture. This will both increase our knowledge and sharpen our
memory; seeing by experience we find, that in every trade they who are
most exercised are ever most expert (Heb. v. 14.) But in anywise,
remember so to dispose all these private exercises, as that thou mayest
be with the first in the holy congregation at the evening exercise;
where behave thyself in the like devotion and reverence as was
prescribed for the holy exercise of the morning.

After evening prayer, and at thy supper, behave thyself in the like
religious and holy manner as was formerly prescribed. And either before
or after supper, if the season of the year and weather do serve--

1. Walk into the fields and meditate upon the works of God; for in
every creature thou mayest read, as in an open book, the wisdom, power,
providence, and goodness of Almighty God (Psal. xcii. 5; xix. 1, &c.;
viii. 1, 3, &c.; Rom. i. 19, 20;) and that none is able to make all
these things in the variety of their forms, virtues, beauties, life,
motions, and qualities, but our most glorious God (Isa. xl. 26.)

2. Consider how gracious he is that made all these things to serve us
(Psal. viii.)

3. Take occasion hereby to stir up both thyself and others to admire
and adore his power, wisdom, and goodness; and to think what ungrateful
wretches we are, if we will not, in all obedience, serve and honour
him.

4. If any neighbour be sick, or in any heaviness, go to visit him (Jam.
v. 14, &c.) If any be fallen at variance, help to reconcile them.

To conclude, three sorts of works may lawfully be done on the Sabbath
day.

1. Works of piety, which either directly concern the service of God,
though they be performed by bodily labour; as, under the law, the
priests laboured in killing and dressing of sacrifices, and burning
them on the altar (Matt. xii. 5.) And Christians under the Gospel when
they travel far to the places of God's worship, it is but a Sabbath
day's journey (Acts i. 12), like to that of the Shunamite, who
travelled from home to hear the prophet on the Sabbath day, because she
had no teaching near her own dwelling (2 Kings iv. 22.) And the
preacher, though he labours in the sweat of his brow to the wearying of
his body, yet he doth but a Sabbath day's work. For the holy end
sanctifieth the work, as the temple did the gold, or the altar the gift
thereon;--or else such bodily labour, whereby the people of God are
assembled to his worship, as the sounding of trumpets under the law
(Numb. x. 2, 3), or the ringing of bells under the gospel.

2. Works of charity, as to save the life of a man (John v. 9; Mark iii.
4), or of a beast (Matt. xii. 11;) to fodder, water, and dress cattle
(Luke xiii. 15;) to make honest provision of meat and drink (Matt. xii.
l;) to refresh ourselves, and to relieve the poor, to visit the sick,
to make collections for the poor, and such like (1 Cor. xvi. 1.)

3. Works of necessity, not feigned, but present and imminent, and such
as could not be prevented before, nor can be deferred to another
day--as to resist the invasion of enemies, or the robberies of thieves;
to quench the rage of fire, and for physicians to stanch or let blood,
or to cure any other desperate disease; and for midwives to help women
in labour; mariners may do their labour; soldiers, being assailed, may
fight; and such like. On these or the like occasions, a man may
lawfully work. Yea, and when they are called, they may, upon any of
these occasions, go out of the church, and from the holy exercises of
the word and sacraments: provided always, that they be humbled that
such occasions fall out upon that day and time; and that they take no
money for their pains on that day, but only for their stuff, as in the
fear of God, and conscience of his commandment.

When the time of rest approaches, retire thyself to some private place;
and knowing that in the state of corruption no man living can sanctify
a Sabbath in that spiritual manner that he should, but that he commits
many breaches thereof, in his thoughts, words, and deeds, humbly crave
pardon for thy defects, and reconcile thyself to God, with this or the
like evening sacrifice:--

[75] I cannot refrain from remarking the careless and indifferent
manner in which too often this divine ordinance is administered, as
well as witnessed. And it is a fact, evident to the most common
observer, that, generally, the minister who lays the greatest stress
upon the regenerating efficacy of the mere rite itself, is the most
remarkable for the indevout and regardless manner in which he performs
the sacred service; so that spectators who knew no better might well
suppose that he was hurrying over some unmeaning and distasteful
ceremony, destitute of divine sanction, which had been imposed upon
him, instead of dispensing a holy ordinance, necessary to salvation,
commanded by Christ himself.

[76] If thou be a private man, either perform these holy duties by
thyself, or join with some godly family in the performance of them.

<p>
  <a class="prev" href="17.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="19.html">Next</a>
</p>
