<p>
  <a class="prev" href="18.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="20.html">Next</a>
</p>

## A private Evening Prayer for the Lord's day.

O holy, holy, holy Lord God of Sabaoth! Suffer me, who am but dust and
ashes, to speak unto thy most glorious majesty. I know that thou art a
consuming fire; I acknowledge that I am but withered stubble: my sins
are in thy sight, and Satan stands at my right hand to accuse me for
them. I come not to excuse but to judge myself worthy of all those
judgments which thy justice might most justly inflict upon me, a
wretched creature, for my sins and transgressions. The number of them
is so great, the nature of them is so grievous, that they make me seem
vile in my own eyes; how much more loathsome in thy sight? I confess
they make me so far from being worthy to be called thy son, that I am
altogether unworthy to have the name of thy meanest servant; and if
thou shouldst but recompense me according to my desert, the earth, as
weary of such a sinful burden, should open her mouth and swallow me up,
like one of Dathan's family, into the bottomless pit of hell. For if
thou didst not spare the natural branches, those angels of glorious
excellency, but didst hurl them down from the heavenly habitations into
the pains of hellish darkness, to be kept unto damnation, when they
sinned but once against thy Majesty, and didst expel our first parents
out of paradise when they did but transgress one of thy laws; alas!
what vengeance may I expect, who have not offended in one sin only,
heaping daily sin upon sin without any true repentance, drinking
iniquity as it were water, ever pouring in but never pouring out any
filthiness, and have transgressed not one, but all thy holy laws and
commandments? Yea, this present day which thou hast straitly commanded
me to keep holy to thy praise and worship, I have not so religiously
kept and observed, nor prepared my soul in that holiness and purity of
heart, as was fit to meet thy blessed Majesty in the holy assembly of
the saints. I have not attended to the preaching of thy word, nor to
the administration of thy sacraments, with that humility, reverence,
and devotion that I should: for though I was present at those holy
exercises in my body, yet, Lord, I was overtaken with much drowsiness;
and when I was awake my mind was so distracted and carried away with
vain and worldly thoughts, that my soul seemed to be absent and out of
the church. I have not so duly, as I should, meditated with myself, nor
conferred with my family upon those good instructions which we have
heard and received out of thy holy word by the public ministry: for
default of which, Satan hath stolen the most part of those instructions
out of my heart, and I, wretched creature, have forgotten them as
though they had never been heard. And my family doth not thrive in
knowledge and sanctification under my government, as they should.
Though I know where many of my poor brethren live in want and
necessity, and some in pain, and comfortless; yet I have not remembered
to relieve the one with my alms, nor the other with consolations; but I
have feasted myself and satisfied my own lusts. I have spent the most
part of the day in idle talk and vain exercises; yea, Lord, I have,
&c.--[Here confess whatsoever fault thou hast done that day by omission
or commission, and then fetching from thy heart a deep sigh, say]--and
for all these my sins, my conscience cries guilty, thy law condemns me,
and I am in thy hand to receive the sentence and the curse due to the
wilful breach of so holy a commandment. But what if I am by thy law
condemned? yet, Lord, thy gospel assures me that thy mercy is above all
thy works; that thy grace transcends thy law; and thy goodness
delighteth there to reign where sins do most abound. In the multitude
of thy mercies, and for the merits of Jesus Christ my Saviour, I
beseech thee, O Lord, who despisest not the sighings of a contrite
heart, nor desirest the death of a penitent sinner, to pardon and
forgive me all those my sins, and all the errors of this day and of my
whole life, and free my soul from that curse and judgment which is due
unto me for them. Thou that didst justify the contrite publican for
four words of confession, and receive the prodigal child, when he had
spent all the stock of thy grace, into favour upon his repentance;
pardon my sins likewise, O Lord, and suffer me not to perish for my
transgressions. O spare me, and receive me into thy favour again. Wilt
thou, O Lord, who hast received all publicans, harlots, and sinners,
that upon repentance sued to thee for grace, reject me? shall I alone
be excluded from thy mercy? Far be it from me to think so: for thou art
the same God of mercy to me that thou wast to them, and thy compassions
never fail. Wherefore, O Lord, deal not with me after my merits, but
according to thy great mercy; execute not thy severe justice against me
a sinner, but exercise thy long-sufferance in forbearing thy own
creature. I have nothing to present unto thee for a satisfaction, but
only those bloody wounds, bitter death and passion, which thy blessed
Son, my only Saviour, hath suffered for me. Him, in whom only thou art
well pleased, I offer unto thee for all my sins wherewith thou art
displeased: him, my Mediator, the request of whose blood, speaking
better things than that of Abel, thy mercy can never gainsay.
Illuminate my understanding and sanctify my heart with thy Holy Spirit,
that it may bring to my remembrance all those good and profitable
lessons which this day and at other times have been taught me out of
thy holy word; that I may remember thy commandments to keep them--thy
judgments to avoid them--and thy sweet promises to rely upon them, in
time of misery and distress. And now, O Lord, I resign myself to thy
most holy will: O receive me into thy favour, and so draw me by thy
grace unto thyself, that I may as well be thine by love and imitation
as by calling and creation. And give me grace so to keep holy thy
Sabbaths in this life, that when this life is ended, I may, with all
thy saints and angels, celebrate an eternal Sabbath of joy and praise
to the honour of thy most glorious name, in thy heavenly kingdom for
evermore. Amen.

And then calling thy family together, shut up the Sabbath with the
meditations and prayers before prescribed for thy family. And the Lord
will give thee that night a more sweet and quiet rest than ordinary,
and prosper thee the better in all the labours of the week following.

Thus far of the ordinary practice of piety, both in private and public:
Now follows the extraordinary practice of piety, whereby God is
glorified in our lives.

The extraordinary practice of piety consists, either in Fasting or
Feasting.

<p>
  <a class="prev" href="18.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="20.html">Next</a>
</p>
