## Of the Practice of Piety in Fasting.

There are divers kinds of fasting--First, A constrained fast, as when
men either have not food to eat, as in the famine of Samaria (2 Kings
vi. 25;) or, having food, cannot eat it for heaviness or sickness, as
it befel them who were in the ship with St. Paul (Acts xxvii. 33.) This
is rather famine than fasting.

Secondly, A natural fast, which we undertake physically, for the health
of our body.

Thirdly, A civil fast, which the magistrate enjoins for the better
maintenance of the commonwealth.

Fourthly, A miraculous fast, as the forty days' fast of Moses and
Elias, the types, and of Christ, the substance. This is rather to be
admired than imitated.

Fifthly, A daily fast, when a man is careful to use the creatures of
God with such moderation, that he is not made heavier, but more
cheerful to serve God, and to do the duties of his calling (1 Tim. iii.
3; Tit. ii. 3.) This is especially to be observed by ministers and
Judges (Prov. xxxi. 4, 5.)

Sixthly, A religious fast (2 Cor. vi. 4, 5), which a man voluntarily
undertakes to make his body and soul the fitter to pray more fervently
to God upon some extraordinary occasion. And of this fast only we are
to treat. The religious fast is of two sorts, either private or public.

 I. Of a Private Fast.

That we may rightly perform a private fast, four things are to be
observed:--First, The author; Secondly, The time and occasion; Thirdly,
The manner; Fourthly, The ends of private fasting.

1. Of the Author.

The first that ordained fasting was God himself in paradise; and it was
the first law that God made, in commanding Adam to abstain from eating
the forbidden fruit. God would not pronounce nor write his law without
fasting (Lev. xxiii), and in his law commands all his people to fast.
So does our Saviour Christ likewise teach all his disciples under the
New Testament (Matt. vi. 17; ix. 15.) By religious fasting a man comes
nearest the life of angels, and to "do God's will on earth, as it is
done in heaven." Yea, nature seems to teach man this duty, in giving
him a little mouth, and a narrower throat; for nature is content with a
little, grace with less. Neither doth nature and grace agree in any one
act better than in this exercise of religious fasting; for it
strengthens the memory, and clears the mind--illuminates the
understanding, and bridles the affections--mortifies the flesh,
prevents sickness, and continues health--it delivers from evils, and
procures all kind of blessings.

By breaking this fast, the serpent overthrew the first Adam, so that he
lost paradise. But by keeping a fast the second Adam vanquished the
serpent, and restored us into heaven. Fasting was she who covered Noah
safe in the ark, whom intemperance uncovered, and left stark naked in
the vineyard. By fasting Lot quenched the flame of Sodom, whom
drunkenness scorched with the fire of incest. Religious fasting and
talking with God, made Moses's face to shine before men, when
idolatrous eating and drinking caused the Israelites to appear
abominable in the sight of God. It wrapt up Elias in an angelical coach
to heaven, when voluptuous Ahab was sent in a bloody chariot to hell.
It made Herod believe that John Baptist should live after death by a
blessed resurrection; when, after an intemperate life, he could promise
nothing to himself but eternal death and destruction. O divine
ordinance of a divine author!

2. Of the Time.

The holy Scripture appoints no time under the New Testament to fast;
but leaves it to Christians' own free choice (Rom. xiv. 3; 1 Cor. vii.
5), to fast as occasions shall be offered to them (Matt. ix. 15;) as
when a man becomes an humble, an earnest suitor to God for the pardon
of some gross sin committed; or for the prevention of some sin to which
a man feels himself by Satan solicited; or to obtain some special
blessing which he wants; or to avert some judgment which a man fears,
or is already fallen upon himself or others; or, lastly, to subdue his
flesh to his spirit, that he may more cheerfully pour forth his soul to
God by prayer. Upon these occasions a man may fast a day or longer, as
his occasion requires, and the constitution of his body and other
needful affairs will permit (Lev. xxiii. 32; Josh. vii. 6; Esth. iv.
16.)

3. Of the Manner of a Private Fast.

The true manner of performing a private fast consists partly in
outward, partly in inward actions.

The outward actions are, to abstain, for the time that we fast--First,
From all worldly business and labour, making our fasting day, as it
were, a Sabbath day (Lev. xxiii. 28, 36; Joel i. 14; ii. 15;) for
worldly business will distract our minds from holy devotion.

Secondly, From all manner of food; yea, from bread and water, so far as
health will permit (2 Sam. iii. 35; Ezra x. 6; Dan. x. 3; Est. iv. 16;
Acts ix. 9.)

1. That so we may acknowlege our own indignity, as being unworthy of
life and all the means for its maintenance. 2. That by afflicting the
body, the soul, which follows the constitution thereof, may be the more
humbled. 3. That so we may take a godly revenge upon ourselves for
abusing our liberty in the use of God's creatures (2 Cor. vii. 11.) 4.
That by the hunger of our bodies, through want of these earthly things,
our souls may learn to hunger more eagerly after spiritual and heavenly
food. 5. To put us in mind that as we abstain from food which is
lawful, so we should much more abstain from sin, which is altogether
unlawful.

Thirdly, From good and costly apparel (Exod. xxxiii. 5, 6;) that as the
abuse of these puffs us up with pride, so the laying aside their lawful
use may witness our humility. And to this end in ancient times they
used, especially in public fasts, to put on sackcloth, or other coarse
apparel (Est. iv. 1, 2; Jonah iii. 5, 6; Joel. i. 13; Matt. xi. 21.)
The equity of which still remains, especially in public fasts, at which
time to come into the assembly with starched bands, crisped hair, brave
apparel, and decked with flowers, or perfumes, argues a soul that is
neither humble before God, nor ever knew the true use of so holy an
exercise.

Fourthly, From the full measure of ordinary sleep (2 Sam. xii. 16; Joel
i. 13; Est. iv. 3.) That thou mayest that way also humble thy body; and
that thy soul may watch and pray, to be prepared for the coming of
Christ. And if thou wilt break thy sleep early and late for worldly
gain, how much more shouldst thou do it for the service of God? And if
Ahab, in imitation of the godly, did in his fast lie in sackcloth, to
break his sleep by night (1 Kings xxi. 27), what shall we think of
those who on a fasting-day will yield themselves to sleep in the open
church?

Fifthly and lastly, From all outward pleasures of our senses: so that
as it was not the throat only that sinned, so must not the throat only
be punished; and therefore we must endeavour to make our eyes, as at
all times, so especially on that day, to fast from beholding vanities,
our ears from hearing mirth or music, but such as may move to mourn;
our nostrils from pleasant smells, our tongues from lying, dissembling,
and slandering; that so nothing may hinder our true humiliation, but
that all may be signs that we are unfeignedly humbled. Thus much of the
outward manner.

The inward manner of fasting consists in two things:--1. Repentance; 2.
Prayer.

Repentance hath two parts:--1. Penitency for sins past; 2. Amendment of
life in time to come.

This penitency consists in three things--First, An inward insight of
sin, and sense of mercy; Secondly, A bewailing of thy vile state;
Thirdly, An humble and particular confession of all thy known sins,

1. Of the inward insight of Sin, and sense of Misery.

This sense and insight will be effected in thee--First, by considering
thy sins, especially thy gross sins, according to the circumstance of
the time when, place where, manner how, and persons with whom, it was
committed. Secondly, the majesty of God against whom it was done; and
the rather, because thou didst such things against him since he became
a Father unto thee, and bestowed so many sweet blessings in a bountiful
manner upon thee. Thirdly, in considering the curses which God has
threatened for thy sin; how grievously God has plagued others for the
same fault, and that no means in heaven or earth could deliver thee
from being eternally damned for them, had not the Son of God so
lovingly died for thee. Lastly, that if God loves thee, he must chasten
thee, ere it be long, with some grievous afflictious, unless thou dost
prevent him by speedy and unfeigned repentance. Let these and the like
considerations so prick thy heart with sorrow, that melting for remorse
within thee, it may be dissolved into a fountain of tears, trickling
down thy mournful cheeks. This mourning is the beginning of true
fasting, and therefore oft-times put for fasting, the first and
principal part for the whole action (Matt. ix. 15.) [77]

2. Of the Bewailing of thy own State.

Bewailing or lamentation is the pouring out of the inward mourning of
the heart, by the outward means of the voice, and tears of the eyes
(Jer. xxxi. 18, 19, 20.) With such filial earnestness and importunity
in prayer, is our heavenly Father well pleased; nay, when it is the
fruit of his Spirit, and the effect of our faith, he cannot be
displeased with it: for if he heard the moans which extremity wrung
from Ishmael and Hagar, and hears the cry of the young ravens, and
roaring of lions, how much rather will he hear the mournful
lamentations which his own children make to him in their misery?

3. Of the humble Confession of Sins.

In this action thou must deal plainly with God, and acknowledge all the
sins thou knowest, not only in general, but also in particular (1 Sam.
vii. 6; Ezek. ix. 4; Dan. ix; Neh. i.) This has been the manner of all
God's children in their fasts--First, because that without confession,
thou hast no promise of mercy or forgiveness of sins (Prov. xxviii. 13;
Psal. xxxii. 5;) secondly, that so thou mayest acknowledge God to be
just, and thyself unrighteous (Psal. li. 4) thirdly, that by the
numbering of thy sins, thy heart may be the more humbled and pulled
down; fourthly, that it may appear that thou art truly penitent; for
till God has given thee grace to repent, thou wilt be more ashamed to
confess thy fault, than to commit thy sin. The plainer thou dealest in
this respect with God, the more graciously will God deal with thee; for
if thou dost "acknowledge thy sins, God is faithful and just to forgive
thee thy sins; and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son shall cleanse thee
from all thy sins."

To help thee the better to perform these three parts of penitency, thou
mayest diligently read such chapters and portions of the holy
Scriptures, as chiefly concern thy particular sins; that thou mayest
see God's curse and judgments on others for the like sins, and be the
more humbled thyself.

Thus far of the first part of repentance, which is penitency.

The other part, which is amendment of life, consists, First, In devout
prayer; Secondly, In devout actions.

This devout prayer, which we make in time of fasting, is either
deprecation of evil, or craving needful good things.

Deprecation of evil is, when thou beseechest God, for Christ the
Mediator's sake, to pardon thee thy sins which thou hast confessed, and
to turn from thee those judgments which are due to thee for thy sins:
And as Ben-hadad, because he heard that the king of Israel was
merciful, prostrated himself to him with a rope about his neck (1 Kings
xx. 31;) so, because thou knowest that the King of heaven is merciful,
cast down thyself in his presence, in all true signs of humiliation
(especially seeing he calleth upon thee to come to him in thy
troubles), and doubtless thou shalt find him most merciful (Psal. 1.
15.)

The craving of needful good things, is, First, a fervent and faithful
begging of God, to seal, by his Spirit in thy heart, the assurance of
the forgiveness of all thy sins. Secondly, to renew thy heart by the
Holy Ghost, so that sin may daily decay, and righteousness more and
more increase in thee (Phil. i. 6.) Lastly, in desiring a supply of
faith, patience, charity, and all other graces which thou wantest (1
Tim. i. 5;) and an increase of those which God of his mercy has
bestowed upon thee already. Thus far of Prayer and Fasting.

The devout actions in fasting are two--First, Avoiding evil. Secondly,
Doing good.

1. Of avoiding Evil.

This abstinence from evil is that which is chiefly signified by thy
abstinence from food, &c., and is the chief end of fasting, as the
Ninevites very well knew (Jonah iii. 8, 10.) A day of fast, and not
fasting from sin, the Lord abhorreth. It is not the vacuity of the
stomach, but the purity of the heart, that God respects. If, therefore,
thou wouldst have God to turn from thee the evil of affliction, thou
must first turn away from thyself the evil of transgression. And
without this fasting from evil, thy fast savours more noisome to God
than thy breath doth to man. This made God so often to reject the fast
of the Jews (Isa. i. 13; lviii. 3, &c.; Zech. vii. 5.) And as thou must
endeavour to avoid all sin, so especially that sin wherewith thou hast
provoked God, either to shake his rod at thee, or already to lay his
chastening hand upon thee. And do this with a resolution, by the
assistance of God's grace, never to commit those sins again. For what
shall it profit a man by abstinence to humble his body, if his mind
swell with pride? or to forbear wine and strong drink, and to be drunk
with wrath and malice? or to let no flesh go into the belly, when lies,
slanders, and ribaldry, which are worse than meat, come out of the
mouth? To abstain from meat, and to do mischief, is the devil's fast,
who doeth evil, and is ever hungry.

2. Of doing Good Works.

The good works which as a Christian thou must do every day, but
especially on thy fasting day, are either the works of piety to God, or
the works of charity towards thy brethren.

First, The works of piety to God, are the practice of all the former
duties in the sincerity of a good conscience, and in the sight of God.

Secondly, The works of charity towards our brethren are, forgiving of
wrongs, remitting debts to the poor that are not well able to pay; but
especially in giving alms to the poor that want relief and sustenance
(Isa. lviii. 6, &c.; Zech. vii. 9, 10.) Else we shall, under pretence
of godliness, practise miserableness; like those who will pinch their
own bellies, to defraud their labouring servants of their due
allowance. As, therefore, Christ joined fasting, prayer, and alms
together in precept, so must thou join them together, like Cornelius,
in practice. And therefore be sure to give at the least so much to the
poor, on thy fasting day, as thou wouldst have spent in thine own diet,
if thou hadst not fasted that day. And remember, that "he that soweth
plenteously shall reap plenteously" (2 Cor. ix. 6), and that this is a
special sowing day. Let thy fasting so afflict thee, that it may
refresh a poor Christian; and rejoice that thou hast dined and supped
in another; or rather, that thou hast feasted hungry Christ, in his
poor members.

In giving alms, observe two things: First, The Rules; Secondly, The
Rewards.

1. Rules in giving of Alms and doing Good Works.

1. They must be done in obedience to God's commandments: not because we
think it good, but because God requires us to do such and such a good
deed; for such obedience of the worker God prefers before all
sacrifices, and the greatest works (1 Sam. xv. 22.)

2. They must proceed from faith, else they cannot please God (Heb. xi.
6; Rom. xiv. 23:) Nay, without faith, the most specious works are but
shining sins and Pharisees' alms.

3. Thou must not think by thy good works and alms to merit heaven; for
in vain had the Son of God shed his blood, if heaven could have been
purchased either for money or meat. Thou must therefore seek heaven's
possession by the purchase of Christ's blood, not by the merits of
thine own works; for "eternal life is the gift of God through Jesus
Christ." (Rom. vi. 23.) Yet every true Christian that believes to be
saved, and hopes to come to heaven, must do good works, as the apostle
saith, for necessary uses, which are four:--First, that God may be
glorified (1 Cor. x. 31; 2 Cor. viii. 19; Phil. i. 11;) Secondly, that
thou mayest shew thyself thankful for thy redemption (Luke i. 74, 75;)
Thirdly, that thou mayest make sure thine election unto thyself (2 Pet.
i. 10;) Fourthly, that thou mayest win others, by thy holy devotion, to
think the better of thy Christian profession (Matt. v. 16; Isa. lxi.
9.) And for these uses we are said to be "God's workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, and that God hath ordained us to walk in
them." (Eph. ii. 10.)

4. Thou must not give thine alms to impudent vagabonds, who live in
wilful idleness and filthiness, but to the religious and honest poor,
who are either sick, or so old that they cannot work; or such who work,
but their work cannot competently maintain them: seek out those in the
back lanes, and relieve them. But if thou meetest one. that asketh an
alms for Jesus' sake, and knowest him not to be unworthy, deny him not;
for it is better to give unto ten counterfeits, than to suffer Christ
to go, in one poor saint, unrelieved. Look not on the person, but give
thy alms as unto Christ in the party.

2. Of the Rewards of Alms-deeds and Good Works.

1. Alms are a special means to move God in mercy to turn away his
temporal judgments from us, when we by a true faith, that sheweth
itself by such fruits, do return to him (Dan. iv. 27.)

2. Merciful alms-givers shall be the children of the Highest (Luke vi.
35, 36), and be like their Father, who is the Father of mercies (2 Cor.
i. 3.) They shall be his stewards, to dispose his goods (Luke xvi. 1;)
his hands, to distribute his alms: and if it be so great an honour to
be the king's almoner, how much greater is it to be the God of heaven's
alms-giver?

3. When all this world shall forsake us, then only good works and good
angels shall accompany us, the one to receive their reward (Rev. xiv.
13), the other to deliver their charge ( Luke xvi. 22; Psal. xci. 11;
Heb. i. 14.)

4. Liberality in alms-deeds is our surest foundation that we shall
obtain, in eternal life, a liberal reward through the merits and mercy
of Christ (1 Tim. vi. 19.)

Lastly, By alms-deeds we feed and relieve Christ in his members; and
Christ at the last day will acknowledge our love, and reward us in his
mercy (Matt. xxv.;) and then it shall appear, that what we gave to the
poor was not lost, but lent unto the Lord (Prov. xix. 17.) What,
greater motives can a Christian wish, to excite him to be a liberal
alms-giver?

Thus far of the manner of fasting: Now follow the ends.

3. Of the Ends of Fasting.

The true ends of fasting are not to merit God's favour or eternal life,
for that we have only of the gift of God through Christ; nor to place
religion in holy abstinence, for fasting in itself is not the worship
of God, but an help to further us the better to worship God. But the
true ends of fasting are three:--

First, To subdue our flesh to the Spirit; but not so to weaken our
bodies, as that we are made unfit to do the necessary duties of our
calling (1 Tim. v. 23.) "A good man," saith Solomon, "is merciful to
his beast" (Prov. xii. 10), much more to his own body.

Secondly, That we may more devoutly contemplate God's holy will, and
fervently pour forth our souls to him by prayer (Joel ii. 17; Luke ii.
37; 1 Cor. vii. 5.) For as there are some kind of devils, so there are
also some kind of sins, which cannot be subdued but by fasting, joined
to prayer (Matt. xvii. 21.)

Thirdly, That by our serious humiliation, and judging of ourselves, we
may escape the judgment of the Lord (Joel ii. 18, 19; 1 Cor. xi.;) not
for the merit of our fasting (which is none), but for the mercy of God,
who has promised to remove his judgments from us, when we by fasting
unfeignedly humble ourselves before him. And indeed no child of God
ever conscionably used this holy exercise, but in the end he obtained
his request at the hand of God; both in receiving graces which he
wanted, as appears in the examples of Hannah, Jehoshaphat, Nehemiah,
Daniel, Esther (1 Sam. i. 7; 2 Chron. xx.; Neh. i.; Dan. ix.; Esth.
iv.;) as also in turning away judgments threatened, or fallen upon him,
as may be seen in the examples of the Israelites, the Ninevites,
Rehoboam, Ahab, Hezekiah, Mannasseh (1 Sam. vii. 6; Jonah iii.; 2
Chron. xii. 5, 7, &c.; 1 Kings xxi.; 2 Chron. xxxii.; xxxiii. 18, 19.)
He who gave his dear Son from heaven to the death, to ransom us when we
were his enemies, thinks nothing too dear on earth to bestow upon us,
when we humble ourselves, being made his reconciled friends and
children.

Thus far of the private fast.

[77] Can the children mourn? then shall they fast. And Mark and Luke,
for mourn, have fast. Examples: Psal. vi., Psalm 22:1, Psalm 38:1,
Psalm 79:1lxxix.; Jeremiah's Lamentations; Joel ii. 12, 17.

 II. Of the Public Fast.

A public fast is when, by the authority of the magistrate (Jonah iii.
7; 2 Chron. xx. 3; Ezra viii. 21), either the whole church within his
dominion, or some special congregation, whom it concerneth, assemble
themselves together, to perform the fore-mentioned duties of
humiliation; either for the removing of some public calamity threatened
or already inflicted upon them, as the sword, invasion, famine,
pestilence, or other fearful sickness (1 Sam. vii. 5, 6; Joel ii. 15; 2
Chron. xx.; Jonah iii. 5; Esth. iv. 16;) or else for the obtaining of
some public blessing, for the good of the church,--as to crave the
assistance of his Holy Spirit, in the election and ordination of fit
and able pastors, &c., or for the trial of truth, and execution of
justice, in matters of difficulty and great importance, &c. (Exod.
xix.; Acts i. 13, 14.)

When any evil is to be removed, the pastors are to lay open to the
people, by the evidence of God's word, the sins which were the special
causes of that calamity; call upon them to repent, and publish to them
the mercies of God in Christ upon their repentance (Joel. i. 14; Neh.
viii.) The people must hear the voice of God's messengers with hearty
sorrow for their sins; earnestly beg pardon in Christ, and promise
unfeigned amendment of their life. When any blessing is to be obtained,
the pastors must lay open to the people the necessity of that blessing,
and the goodness of God who giveth such graces for the good of men. The
people must devoutly pray to God for bestowing of that grace, and that
be would bless his own means to his own glory, and the good of his
church. And when the holy exercise is done, let every Christian have a
special care, according to his ability, to remember the poor (Isa.
lviii. 7, 10; 2 Cor. ix. 7; Gal. ii. 10.) And whosoever, when just
occasion is offered, useth not this holy exercise of fasting, he may
justly suspect that his heart never yet felt the power of true
Christianity.

So much of fasting: Now followeth the exercise of holy feasting.
