## Of the Practice of Piety in Holy Feasting.

Holy feasting is a solemn thanksgiving, appointed by authority, to be
rendered to God on some special day, for some extraordinary blessings
or deliverances received. Such among the Jews was the feast of the
Passover (Exod. xii. 15), to remember to praise God for their
deliverance out of Egypt's bondage; or the feast of Purim (Esth. ix.
19, 21), to give thanks for their deliverance from Haman's conspiracy.
Such amongst us is the fifth of November, to praise God for the
deliverance of the king and the whole state, from the Popish Gunpowder
treason. Such feasts are to be celebrated by a public rehearsal of
those special benefits, by spiritual psalms and dances, by mutual
feasting, and sending presents every man to his neighbour, and by
giving gifts to the poor.

But forasmuch as the benefit of our redemption was the greatest that
man needs from God, or that God ever bestowed upon man; and that the
Lord's Supper is left by our Redeemer as the chiefest memorial of our
redemption; every Christian should account this holy supper his
chiefest and most joyful feast in this world. And seeing that as it
ministereth to worthy partakers the greatest assurance which they have
of their salvation, so it pulleth temporal judgments on the bodies, and
(without repentance) eternal damnation on the souls of them who receive
it unworthily; let us see how a Christian may best fit himself to be a
due partaker of so holy a feast, and to be a worthy guest at so sacred
a supper.
