<p>
  <a class="prev" href="21.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="23.html">Next</a>
</p>

## Meditations concerning the due manner of practising Piety, in receiving the Holy Supper of the Lord.

Though no man living is of himself worthy to be a guest at so holy a
banquet, yet it pleases God of his grace to accept him for a worthy
receiver, who endeavours to receive that holy mystery with that
competent measure of reverence that he has prescribed in his word (2
Thess. i. 11; Col. i. 1, 2; Luke xx. 35; Apoc. iii. 4.)

He that would receive this holy sacrament with due reverence, must
conscionably perform three sorts of duties: First, Those which are to
be done before he receives; Secondly, Those that are to be done in the
receiving; Thirdly, Those that are to be done after that he has
received the sacrament. The first is called preparation; the second,
meditation; the third, action or practice.

I. Of Preparation.

That a Christian ought necessarily to prepare himself before he presume
to be a partaker of the holy communion, may evidently appear by five
reasons:--

First, Because it is God's commandment; for if he commanded, under the
pain of death, that none uncircumcised should eat the paschal lamb
(Exod. xii. 48), nor any circumcised under four days preparation, how
much greater preparation does he require of him that comes to receive
the sacrament of his body and blood? which, as it succeeds, so doth it
exceed by many degrees the sacrament of the passover.

Secondly, Because the example of Christ teaches us so much; for he
washed his disciples' feet before he admitted them to eat of this
supper; signifying how thou shouldst lay aside all impureness of heart,
and uncleanness of life, and be furnished with humility and charity,
before thou presumest to taste of this holy supper (John xiii. 5.)

Thirdly, Because it is the counsel of the Holy Ghost: "Let every man
examine himself and so let him eat," &c. (1 Cor. xi. 28.) And if a man,
when he is to eat with an earthly prince, must consider diligently what
is before him, and put a knife to his throat, rather than commit any
rudeness (Prov. xxiii. 1, 2), how much more oughtest thou to prepare
thy soul, that thou mayest behave thyself with all fear and reverence
when thou art to feast at the holy table of the Prince of princes.

Fourthly, Because it has been ever the practice of all God's saints, to
use holy preparation before they would meddle with divine mysteries.
David would not go near to God's altar, till he had first washed his
hands in innocency (Psal. xxvi. 6;) much less shouldst thou, without
due preparation, approach the Lord's table. Abimelech would not give,
nor David and his men would not eat the shew-bread, but on condition
that they were pure from all defilement (1 Sam. xxi. 4;) how much less
shouldst thou presume to eat the Lord's bread, or rather the bread
which is the Lord, unless thy heart be first cleansed by repentance?
And if the Lord required Joshua, as he had done Moses before, to put
off his shoes, in reverence of his holiness (Exod. iii. 5; Josh. v.
14), who was present in that place, where he appeared with a sword in
his hand, for the destruction of his enemies; how much rather shouldst
thou put off all the affections of thine earthly conversation, when
thou comest near that place, where Christ appeareth to the eye of thy
faith, with wounds in his hands and side, for the redemption of his
friends? And for this cause it is said, that the Lamb's wife hath made
herself ready for the marriage (Rev. xix. 7.) Prepare therefore
thyself, if thou wilt in this life he betrothed unto Christ by
sacramental grace, or in heaven married unto him by eternal glory.

Fifthly, Because God hath ever smitten with fearful judgments those who
have presumed to use his holy ordinances without due fear and
preparation. God set a flaming sword in a cherubim's hand to smite our
first parents, being defiled with sin, if they should attempt to go
into paradise to eat the sacrament of the tree of life (Gen. iii. 24.)
Fear thou, therefore, to be smitten with the sword of God's vengeance,
if thou presumest to go to the church with an impenitent heart, to eat
the sacrament of the Lord of life. God smote 50,000 of the Bethshemites
for looking irreverently into his ark, and killed Uzza with sudden
death, for but rashly touching the ark, and smote Uzziah with a leprosy
for meddling with the priest's office, which pertained not to him (1
Sam. vi. 19; 1 Chron. xiii. 9, &c.; 2 Chron. xxvi. 19.) The fear of
such a stroke made Hezekiah so earnestly pray to God that he would not
smite the people that wanted time to prepare themselves as they should,
to eat the passover: and it is said, that the Lord heard Hezekiah, and
healed the people; intimating, that had it not been for Hezekiah's
prayer, the Lord had smitten the people for their want of due
preparation. And the man who came to the marriage-feast without his
wedding garment, or examining himself, was examined by another; and
thereupon bound hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness (Matt.
xxii. 12.) And St. Paul tells the Corinthians, that for want of this
preparation in examining and judging themselves, before they did eat
the Lord's Supper, God had sent that fearful sickness among them, of
which some were then sick, others weak, and many fallen asleep, that
is, taken away by temporal death; insomuch that the apostle saith, that
every unworthy receiver eats his own judgment,--temporal, if he
repents; eternal, if he repents not; and that in so heinous a measure,
as if he were guilty of the very body and blood of the Lord, whereof
this sacrament is a holy sign and seal (1 Cor. xi. 27, 30.) And princes
punish the indignity offered to their great seal, in as deep a measure
as that which is done to their own persons, whom it represents. And how
heinous the guiltiness of Christ's blood is, may appear by the misery
of the Jews ever since they wished his blood to be on them and their
children (Matt. xxvii. 25.) But then thou wilt say, it were safer to
abstain from coming at all to the holy communion: not so, for God has
threatened to punish the wilful neglect of his sacraments with eternal
damnation both of body and soul (Numb. ix. 13; Heb. ii. 3; Matt. xxvi.
26; 1 Cor. xi. 24.) And it is the commandment of Christ, "Take, eat; do
this in remembrance of me;" and he will have his commandment, under the
penalty of this curse, obeyed. And seeing that this sacrament was the
greatest token of Christ's love, which he left at his end to his
friends whom he loved to the end (John xiii. 1), therefore the neglect
and contempt of this sacrament must argue the contempt and neglect of
his love and blood shedding (Heb. x. 29;) than which no sin in God's
account can seem more heinous. Nothing hinders why thou mayest not come
freely to the Lord's table; but because thou hadst rather want the love
of God, than leave thy filthy sins. O come, but come a guest prepared
for the Lord's table; seeing they are blessed who are called to the
Lamb's supper (Rev. xix. 9.) O come, but come prepared, because the
efficacy of the sacrament is received according to the proportion of
the faith of the receiver.

This preparation consists in the serious consideration of three things:
First, Of the worthiness of the sacrament, which is termed, to discern
the Lord's body; Secondly, Of thine own unworthiness, which is, to
judge thyself; Thirdly, Of the means whereby thou mayest become a
worthy receiver, called communion of the Lord's body.

1. Of the Worthiness of the Sacrament.

The worthiness of this sacrament is considered three ways: First, By
the majesty of the author ordaining; Secondly, By the preciousness of
the parts of which it consists; Thirdly, By the excellency of the ends
for which it was ordained.

(1.) Of the Author of the Sacrament.

The author was not any saint or angel, hut our Lord Jesus, the eternal
Son of God. For it pertains to Christ only, under the New Testament, to
institute a sacrament; because he only can promise and perform the
grace that it signifieth. And we are charged to hear no voice but his
in his church (Matt. xvii. 5.) How sacred should we esteem the
ordinance that proceeds from so divine an author.

(2.) Of the Parts of the Sacrament.

The parts of this blessed sacrament are three: First, The earthly signs
signifying; Secondly, The divine word sanctifying; Thirdly, The
heavenly graces signified.

First, The earthly signs are bread and wine, in number two, but one in
use (1 Cor. xi. 23, &c.; Prov. ix. 5.)

Secondly, The divine, word is the word of Christ's institution,
pronounced with prayers and blessings by a lawful minister (Heb. v. 4;
Numb. xvi. 40; 1 Cor. x. 16.) The bread and wine without the word are
nothing but as they were before; but when the word comes to those
elements, then they are made a sacrament; and God is present with his
own ordinance, and ready to perform whatsoever he promises. The divine
words of blessing do not change or annihilate the substance of the
bread and wine, for if their substance did not remain it could be no
sacrament; but it changes them in use and in name. For that which was
before but common bread and wine to nourish men's bodies, is, after the
blessing, destinated to an holy use, for feeding of the souls of
Christians. And where before they were called but bread and wine, they
are now called by the name of those holy things which they signify, the
body and blood of Christ: the better to draw our minds from those
outward elements to the heavenly graces, which by the sight of our
bodies they represent to the spiritual eyes of our faith. Neither did
Christ direct these words, "This is my body, this is my blood," to the
bread and wine, but to his disciples, as appears by the words going
before, "Take ye, eat ye." Neither is the bread his body, but in the
same sense that the cup is the New Testament, viz. by a sacramental
metonymy And St. Mark notes plainly that the words, "This is my blood,"
&c., were not pronounced by our Saviour till after that all his
disciples had drunk of the cup (Mark xiv, 23, 24.) And afterwards in
respect of the natural substance thereof, he calls that the fruit of
the vine, which, in respect of the spiritual signification thereof, he
had before termed his blood (verse 25), after the manner of terming all
sacraments. And Christ bids us not to make him, but to do this in
remembrance of him; and he bids us eat not simply his body, but his
body as it was then broken, and his blood shed; which St. Paul expounds
to be but the communion of Christ's body, and the communion of his
blood (1 Cor. x. 16;) that is, an effectual pledge that we are
partakers of Christ and of all the merits of his body and blood. And by
the frequent use of this communion, Paul will have us to make a shew of
the Lord's death till he come from heaven (1 Cor. xi. 26; Acts iii. 21;
i. 11), and till we, as eagles, shall be caught up into the air to meet
him who is the blessed carcase and life of our souls (Matt. xxiv. 27,
28.)

Thirdly, The spiritual graces are likewise two: the body of Christ, as
it was with the feeling of God's anger due to us, crucified; and his
blood as it was, in the like sort, shed for the remission of our sins.
They are in number two, but in use one, viz. whole Christ, with all his
benefits, offered to all, and given indeed to the faithful. These are
the three integral parts of this blessed sacrament, the sign, the word,
and the grace. The sign without the word, or the word without the sign,
can do nothing; and both conjoined are unprofitable without the grace
signified; but all three concurring make an effectual sacrament to a
worthy receiver. Some receive the outward sign without the spiritual
grace, as Judas, who, as Austin saith, received the bread of the Lord,
but not the bread which was the Lord. Some receive the spiritual grace
without the outward sign, as the saint thief on the cross, and
innumerable of the faithful who dying desire it, but cannot receive it
through some external impediments; but the worthy receivers to their
comfort receive both in the Lord's Supper.

Christ chose bread and wine, rather than any other elements, to be the
outward signs in this blessed sacrament: First, Because they are
easiest for all sorts to attain unto; Secondly, To teach us that as
man's temporal life is chiefly nourished by bread [78] and cherished by
wine, so are our souls by his body and blood sustained and quickened
unto eternal life. Christ appointed wine with the bread to be the
outward signs in this sacrament, to teach us--First, That as the
perfect nourishment, of man's body consists both of meat and drink; so
Christ is unto our souls not in part, but in perfection, both salvation
and nourishment; Secondly, That by seeing the sacramental wine apart
from the bread, we should remember how all his precious blood was spilt
out of his blessed body for the remission of sins. The outward signs
the pastor gives in the church, and thou dost eat with the mouth of thy
body; the spiritual grace Christ reacheth from heaven, and thou must
eat it with the mouth of thy faith.

(3.) Of the Ends for which this holy Sacrament was ordained.

The excellent and admirable ends or fruits, for which this blessed
sacrament was ordained, are seven.

Of the first End of the Lord's Supper.

1. To keep Christians in a continual remembrance of that propitiatory
sacrifice which Christ, once for all, offered by his death upon the
cross, to reconcile us to God (Matt. xxvi. 26.) "Do this," saith
Christ, "in remembrance of me." (Luke xxii. 19.) And, saith the
apostle, "As oft as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do
shew the Lord's death till he come" (1 Cor. xi. 26;) and he saith that
by this sacrament, and the preaching of the word, Jesus Christ was as
evidently set forth before the eyes of the Galatians, as if he had been
crucified among them (Gal. iii. 1;) for the whole action represents
Christ's death, the breaking of the bread blessed, the crucifying of
his blessed body, and the pouring forth of the sanctified wine, the
shedding of his holy blood. Christ was once in himself really offered
(Heb. ix. 26; x. 12x. 12;) but as oft as the sacrament is celebrated,
so oft is he spiritually offered by the faithful.

Hence the Lord's Supper is called a propitiatory sacrifice, not
properly or really, but figuratively; because it is a memorial of that
propitiatory sacrifice which Christ offered upon the cross. And to
distinguish it from that real sacrifice, the fathers call it the
unbloody sacrifice. [79] It is called the Eucharist, because the
"church in this action offers to God the sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving for her redemption, effected by the true and only
expiatory sacrifice of Christ upon the cross. If the sight of Moab's
king sacrificing on his walls his own son, to move his gods to rescue
him (2 Kings iii. 27), moved the assailing kings to such pity, that
they ceased the assault, and raised their siege, how should the
spiritual sight of God the Father, sacrificing on the cross his
only-begotten Son to save thy soul, move thee to love God thy Redeemer,
and to leave sin, that could not in justice be expiated by any meaner
ransom?

Of the second End of the Lord's Supper.

2. To confirm our faith; for God by this sacrament doth signify and
seal unto us from heaven, that according to the promise and new
covenant which he hath made in Christ, he will truly receive into his
grace and mercy all penitent believers who duly receive this holy
sacrament; and that for the merits of the death and passion of Christ,
he will as verily forgive them all their sins as they are made
partakers of this sacrament. In this respect the holy sacrament is
called "the seal of the new covenant and remission of sins." (Rom. iv.
11; Matt. xxvi. 28; 1 Cor. xi. 25.) In our greatest doubts we may,
therefore, receiving this sacrament, undoubtedly say with Samson's
mother, "If the Lord would kill us, he would not have received a
burnt-offering and a meat-offering at our hands, neither would he have
shewed us all these things, nor would at this time have told us such
things as these." (Judges xiii. 23.)

Of the third End of the Lord's Supper.

3. To be a pledge and symbol of the most near and effectual communion
which Christians have with Christ. "The cup of blessing which we bless,
is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we
break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ?" (1 Cor. x. 16;)
that is, a most effectual sign and pledge of our communion with Christ.
This union is called abiding in us, joining to the Lord, dwelling in
our hearts (John xiv. 16, 23; 1 Cor. vi. 17, kollesis; Eph. iii. 17,
katoikesis)--and set forth in the holy Scriptures by divers
similes:--First, Of the vine and branches (John xv. 5.) Secondly, Of
the head and body (Eph. iii. 6, sussoma; Eph. v. 23; Col. i. 18; Rom.
xii. 4, 5.) Thirdly, Of the foundation and building (Eph. ii. 19, 20.)
Fourthly, Of one loaf confected of many grains (1 Cor. x. 17.) Fifthly,
Of the matrimonial union between man and wife, and such like (Eph. v.
31, 32; Rev. xxi. 2.) And it is threefold between Christ and
Christians. The first is natural, between our human nature, and
Christ's divine nature in the person of the word; the second is
mystical, between our persons absent from the Lord, and the person of
Christ, God and man, in one mystical body; the third is celestial,
between our persons present with the Lord, and the person of Christ in
a body glorified: these three conjunctions depend each upon other; for,
had not our nature been first hypostatically united to the nature of
God in the second Person, we could never have been united to Christ in
a mystical body. And if we be not in this life, though absent, united
to Christ by a mystical union, we shall never have communion of glory
with him in his heavenly presence. The mystical union, chiefly here
meant, is wrought between Christ and us by the Spirit of Christ
apprehending us; and by our faith stirred up by the -same Spirit,
apprehending Christ again: both which St. Paul doth most lively
express--"I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which also I
am apprehended of Christ Jesus." (Phil. iii. 12.) How can he fall away
that holds, and is so firmly holden? This union he shall best
understand in his mind who doth most feel it in his heart. But of all
other times this union is best felt, and most confirmed, when we duly
receive the Lord's Supper: for then we shall sensibly feel our hearts
knit unto Christ, and the desires of our souls drawn by faith and the
Holy Ghost, as by the cords of love, nearer and nearer to his holiness.

From this communion with Christ, there follow to the faithful many
unspeakable benefits--

As, first, Christ took by imputation all their sins and guiltiness upon
him, to satisfy God's justice for them (Rom. iv. 25;) and he freely
gives, by imputation, unto us all his righteousness in this life, and
all his right unto eternal life when this is ended (Phil. iii. 9;) and
counteth all the good or ill that is done unto us, as done unto his own
person (Matt. xxv. 35; Acts ix. 4; Zech. ii. 8.)

Secondly, There floweth from Christ's nature into our nature, united to
him, the lively spirit and breath of grace, which reneweth us to a
spiritual life (Eph. iv. 23, 24;) and so sanctifieth our minds, wills,
and affections, that we daily grow more and more conformable to the
image of Christ (Rom. viii. 29; 2 Cor. iii. 18.)

Thirdly, He bestoweth upon them all saving graces necessary to attain
eternal life, as the sense of God's love, the assurance of our
election, with regeneration, justification, and grace to do good works
(John xv. 5; i. 16; 2 Cor. viii. 1, 4, 6, 7, 19), till we come to live
with him in his heavenly kingdom. This should teach all true Christians
to keep themselves as the undefiled members of Christ's holy body, and
to beware of all uncleanness and filthiness, knowing that they live in
Christ, or rather, that Christ liveth in them. From this union with
Christ (sealed unto us by the Lord's Supper) St. Paul draweth arguments
to withdraw the Corinthians from the pollution both of idolatry and
adultery (1 Cor. x. 7, 8, 16, 21.)

Lastly, From the former communion between Christ and Christians, there
flows another communion between Christians among themselves, which is
also lively represented by the sacrament of the Lord's Supper; in that
the whole church, being many, do all communicate of one bread in that
holy action: "We being many, are one bread and one body; for we are all
partakers of that one bread" (1 Cor. x. 17;) that as the bread which we
eat in the sacrament is but one, though it be confected of many grains;
so all the faithful, though they be many, yet are they but one mystical
body, under one' head, which is Christ. Our Saviour prayed five times,
in that prayer which he made after his last supper, that his disciples
might be one (John xvii. 11, 21, 22, 23, 26), to teach us at once how
much this unity pleases him. This union between the faithful is so
ample, that no distance of place can part it; so strong, that death
cannot dissolve it; so durable, that time cannot wear it out; so
effectual, that it breeds a fervent love between those who never saw
one another's face. And this conjunction of souls is termed the
communion of saints, which Christ effects by six special means:--first,
By governing them all by one and the same Holy Spirit (1 Cor. xii. 13;)
Secondly, By enduing them all with one and the same faith (Eph. iv. 5;)
Thirdly, By shedding abroad his own love into all their hearts (Rom. v.
5;) Fourthly, By regenerating them all by one and the same baptism
(Titus iii. 5; Eph. iv. 5;) Fifthly, By nourishing them all with one
and the same spiritual food (1 Cor. x. 3, 17;) Sixthly, By being one
quickening head of that one body of his church (Col. i. 18), which he
reconciled to God in the body of his flesh (ver. 22.) Hence it was that
the multitude of believers in the primitive church were of one heart
and of one soul, in truth, affection, and compassion (Acts iv. 32.) And
this should teach Christians to love one another, seeing they are all
members of the same holy and mystical body, of which Christ is head.
And therefore they should have all a Christian sympathy and
fellow-feeling, to rejoice one in another's joy, to condole one in
another's grief, to bear with one another's infirmity, and mutually to
relieve one another's wants.

Of the fourth End of the Lord's Supper.

4. To feed the souls of the faithful, in the assured hope of life
everlasting. For this sacrament is a sign and pledge, to as many as
shall receive the same according to Christ's institution, that he will,
according to his promise, by the virtue of his crucified body and
blood, as verily feed our souls to life eternal, as our bodies are by
bread and wine nourished to this temporal life. And to this end,
Christ, in the action of the sacrament, really giveth his very body and
blood to every faithful receiver. [80] Therefore the sacrament is
called the "communion of the body and blood of the Lord." (1 Cor. x.
16.) And communication is not of things absent, but present; [81]
neither were it the Lord's Supper, if the Lord's body and blood were
not there. Christ is verily present in the sacrament, by a double
union: whereof the first is spiritual, between Christ and the worthy
receiver; the second is sacramental, between the body and blood of
Christ, and the outward signs in the sacrament. The former is wrought
by means that the same Holy Spirit, dwelling in Christ and in the
faithful, incorporates the faithful, as members to Christ their head,
and so makes them one with Christ, and partakers of all the graces,
holiness, and eternal glory, which are in him, as sure and as verily as
they hear the words of the promise, and are partakers of the outward
signs of the holy sacrament. Hence it is that the will of Christ is a
true Christian's will, and the Christian's life is Christ, who liveth
in him (Gal. ii. 20.) If ye look to the things that are united, this
union is essential; if to the truth of this union, it is real; if to
the manner how it is wrought, it is spiritual. It is not our faith that
makes the body and blood of Christ to be present, but the Spirit of
Christ dwelling in him and us. Our faith doth but receive and apply to
our souls those heavenly graces which are offered in the sacrament.

The other, being the sacramental union, is not a physical or local, but
a spiritual conjunction of the earthly signs, which are bread and wine,
with the heavenly graces, which are the body and blood of Christ, in
the act of receiving: as if, by a mutual relation, they were but one
and the same thing. Hence it is, that in the same instant of time that
the worthy receiver eats with his mouth the bread and wine of the Lord,
he eateth also with the mouth of his faith the very body and blood of
Christ: [82] not that Christ is brought down from heaven to the
sacrament, but that the Holy Spirit by the sacrament lifts up his mind
unto Christ, [83] not by any local mutation, but by a devout affection;
so that, in the holy contemplation of faith, he is at that present with
Christ, and Christ with him [84] And thus believing and meditating how
Christ's body was crucified, and his precious blood shed for the
remission of his sins, and the reconciliation of his soul unto God, his
soul is hereby more effectually fed in the assurance of eternal life,
than bread and wine can nourish his body to this temporal life. There
must be, therefore, of necessity in the sacrament, both the outward
signs, to be visibly seen with the eyes of the body, and the body and
blood of Christ, to be spiritually discerned with the eye of faith. But
the form, how the Holy Ghost makes the body of Christ, being absent
from us in place, to be present with us by our union, St. Paul terms a
great mystery (Eph. v. 32), such as our understanding cannot worthily
comprehend. The sacramental bread and wine, therefore, are not bare
signifying signs, but such as wherewith Christ indeed exhibits and
gives to every worthy receiver, not only his divine virtue and
efficacy, but also his very body and blood, as verily as he gave to his
disciples the Holy Ghost, by the sign of his sacred breath, or health
to the diseased, by the word of his mouth, or touch of his hand or
garment: [85] and the apprehension by faith is more forcible than the
most exquisite comprehension of sense or reason. To conclude this
point. This holy sacrament is that blessed bread which, being eaten,
opened the eyes of the disciples at Emmaus, that they knew Christ (Luke
xxiv. 30, 41.) This is that lordly cup, by which we are all made to
drink into one Spirit (1 Cor. xii. 13.) This is that rock, flowing with
honey, that reviveth the fainting spirits of every true Jonathan that
tastes it with the mouth of faith (1 Sam. xiv. 27.) This is that barley
loaf, which, tumbling from above, strikes down the tents of the
Midianites of infernal darkness (Judges vii. 13.) Elias's angelical
cake and water preserved him forty days in Horeb (1 Kings xix. 6, 7,
8;) and manna, angels' food, fed the Israelites forty years in the
wilderness (Psal. lxxviii. 24, 25; Exod. xvi. 35;) but this is that
true bread of life, and heavenly manna (John vi. 32, 35, 49, 50), which
if we shall duly eat, will nourish our souls for ever unto life eternal
(ver. 51, 58.) How should, then, our souls make unto Christ that
request from a spiritual desire, which the people of Capernaum did from
a carnal motion, "Lord, evermore give us this bread?" (John vi. 34.)

The fifth End of the Lord's Supper.

5. To be an assured pledge unto us of our resurrection. The
resurrection of a Christian is twofold: First, The spiritual
resurrection of our souls, in this life, from the death of sin (John v.
25; Rom. vi. 4, 5, 11), called the first resurrection; because that by
the trumpet-voice of Christ, in the preaching of the gospel, we are
raised from the death of sin to the life of grace: "Blessed and holy is
he," saith St. John, "who hath part in the first resurrection; for on
such the second death hath no power." (Rev. xx. 6.) The Lord's Supper
is both a mean and a pledge unto us of this spiritual and first
resurrection: "He that eateth me, even he shall live by me." (John vi.
57.) And then we are fit guests to sit at the table with Christ, when,
like Lazarus, we are raised from the death of sin to newness of life
(John xii. 2.)

The truth of this first resurrection will appear by the motion
wherewith they are internally moved: For if, when thou art moved to the
duties of religion and practice of piety, thy heart answers, with
Samuel, "Here I am, speak, Lord, for thy servant heareth" (1 Sam. iii.
10;) and with David, "O God, my heart is ready" (Psal. cviii. 1;) and
with Paul, "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" (Acts ix. 6;) then
surely thou art raised from the death of sin, and hast thy part in this
first resurrection: But if thou remainest ignorant of the true grounds
of religion, and findest in thyself a kind of secret loathing of its
exercises, and must be drawn, as it Were, against thy will, to do the
works of piety, &c., then surely thou hast but a name that thou livest,
but thou art dead, as Christ told the angel of the church of Sardis,
and thy soul is but as salt to keep thy body from stinking.

Secondly, The corporeal resurrection of our bodies at the last day,
which is called the second resurrection, which frees us from the first
death: "He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eternal
life, and I will raise him up at the last day." (John vi. 54.) For this
sacrament signifies and seals to us, that Christ died and rose again
for us, and that his flesh quickeneth and nourisheth us unto eternal
life, and that therefore our bodies shall surely be raised to eternal
life at the last day. For seeing our Head is risen, all the members of
the body shall likewise surely rise again. For how can those bodies,
which, being the weapons of righteousness (Rom. vi. 13), temples of the
Holy Ghost (1 Cor. vi. 19), and members of Christ, having been fed and
nourished with the body and blood of the Lord of life, but be raised up
again at the last day? And this is the cause that the bodies of the
saints, being dead, are so reverently buried and laid to sleep in the
Lord; and their burial-places are termed the beds and dormitories of
the saints (Isa. xxvi. 19, 20.) The reprobates shall arise at the last
day, but by the almighty power of Christ, as he is Judge, bringing
them, as malefactors out of the jail, to receive their sentence, and
deserved execution: but the elect shall arise by virtue of Christ's
resurrection, and of the communion which they have with him, as with
their head. And his resurrection is the cause and assurance of ours.
The resurrection of Christ is a Christian's particular faith: the
resurrection of the dead is the child of God's chiefest confidence.
Therefore Christians in the primitive church were wont to salute one
another in the morning with these phrases: "The Lord is risen;" and the
other would answer, "True, the Lord is risen indeed." Kurios aneste,
orthos aneste.

The sixth End of the Lord's Supper.

6. To seal to us the assurance of everlasting life. Oh what more wished
or loved than life! Or what do all men naturally either fear or abhor
more than death? Yet is this first death nothing, if it be compared
with the second death: neither is this life anything worth, in
comparison of the life to come. If, therefore, thou desirest to be
assured of eternal life, prepare thyself to be a worthy receiver of
this blessed sacrament. For our Saviour assures us, that "if any man
eat of this bread, he shall live for ever; and the bread that I will
give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world." (John
vi. 51.) He, therefore, who duly eateth of this holy sacrament, may
truly say, not only Credo vitam æternam, I believe life everlasting;
but also, Edo vitam ceternam, I eat life everlasting. And indeed, this
is the true tree of life, which God hath planted in the midst of the
paradise of the church; and to eat of which he hath promised to give to
every one that overcometh (Rev. ii. 7.) And this tree of life by
infinite degrees excels the tree of life that grew in the paradise of
Eden; for that had his root in the earth, this from heaven; that gave
but life to the body, this to the soul; that did but preserve the life
of the living, this restoreth life to the dead. The leaves of this tree
heal the nations of believers; and it yields every month a new manner
of fruit, which nourisheth them to life everlasting (Rev. xxii. 2.) Oh,
blessed are they who often eat of this sacrament; at least, once every
month, taste anew of this renewing fruit, which Christ hath prepared
for us at his table, to heal our infirmities, and to confirm our belief
of life everlasting!

Of the seventh End of the Lord's Supper.

7. To bind all Christians, as it were, by an oath of fidelity, to serve
the one only true God; [86] and to admit no other propitiatory
sacrifice for sins, but that one real sacrifice which, by his death,
Christ once offered, and by which he finished the sacrifices of the
law, and effected eternal redemption and righteousness for all
believers; and so to remain for ever a public mark of profession, to
distinguish Christians from all sects and false religions. And seeing
that in the mass there is a strange Christ adored, not he that was born
of the Virgin Mary, but one that is made of a wafer-cake; and that the
offering up of this breaden god is thrust upon the church as "a
propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and the dead;" all true
Christians, upon the danger of wilful perjury before the Lord
Chief-Justice of heaven and earth, are to detest the mass as the idol
of indignation, which is most derogatory to the all-sufficient,
world-saving merits of Christ's death and passion. For by receiving the
sacrament of the Lord's Supper, we all swear that all real sacrifices
are ended by our Lord's death; and that his body and blood, once
crucified and shed, is the perpetual food and nourishment of our souls.

2. How to consider thy own Unworthiness.

A man shall best perceive his own unworthiness, by examining his life
according to the ten commandments of almighty God. Search, therefore,
what duties thou hast omitted, and what vices thou hast committed,
contrary to every one of the commandments: remembering, that without
repentance and God's mercy in Christ, the curse of God (containing all
the miseries of this life, and everlasting torments in hell-fire, when
this is ended) -is due to the breach of the least of God's commandments
(Deut. xxvii. 26; Gal. iii. 10.) And having taken a due survey both of
thy sins and miseries, retire to some secret place, and there, putting
thyself in the sight of the Judge, as a guilty malefactor standing at
the bar to receive his sentence, bowing thy knees to the earth, smiting
thy breast with thy fists, and bedewing thy cheeks with thy tears,
confess thy sins, and humbly ask him mercy and forgiveness, in these or
the like words:--

<p>
  <a class="prev" href="21.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="23.html">Next</a>
</p>
