## An humble Confession of Sins, to be made to God before the receiving of the Holy Communion.

O God and heavenly Father, when I consider the goodness which thou hast
ever shewed unto me, and the wickedness which I have committed against
Heaven and against thee, I am ashamed of myself, and confusion seems to
cover my face as a veil; for which of thy commandments have I not
transgressed? O Lord, I stand here guilty of the breach of all thy holy
laws. For the love of my heart hath not so entirely cleaved unto thy
majesty as to vain and earthly things. I have not feared thy judgments,
to deter me from sins, nor trusted to thy promises, to keep me from
doubting of my temporal, or from despairing of mine eternal state. [87]
I have made the rule of thy divine worship to be what my mind thought
fit, not what thy word prescribed; finding my heart more prone to
remember my blessed Saviour in a painted picture of man's device,
rather than to behold him crucified in his word and sacraments after
his own ordinance. [88] Where I should never use thy name (whereat all
knees do bow) but with religious reverence, nor any part of thy worship
without due preparation and zeal, I have blasphemously abused thy holy
name by rash and customary oaths; yea, I have used oaths by thy sacred
name, as false covers of my filthy sins; and I have been present at thy
service oft-times more for ceremony than conscience, and to please men
more than to please thee, my gracious God. [89]

Where I should sanctify thy Sabbath-day, by being present at the public
exercises of the church, and by meditating privately on the word and
works of God, by visiting the sick, and relieving my poor brethren;
alas! I have thought those holy exercises a burden, because they
hindered my vain sports; yea, I have spent many of thy Sabbaths in my
own profane pleasures, without being present at any of'thy divine
worship. [90]

Where I should have given all due reverence to my natural,
ecclesiastical, and politic parents, I have not shewed that measure of
duty and affection to my parents which their care and kindness hath
deserved. I have not had thy ministers in such singular love for their
work's sake, as I ought; but I have taunted at their zeal, and hated
them because they reproved me justly: and I have carried myself
contemptuously against thy magistrates and ministers, though I knew
that it is thine ordinance that I should be obedient unto them. [91]

Where I should be slow to wrath, and ready to forgive offences, and not
suffer the sun to go down upon my wrath, but to do good for evil,
loving my very enemies for thy sake, I, alas! for one sorry word, have
burst out into open rage; and harbouring thoughts of mischief in my
heart, I have preferred to feed on mine own malice, rather than to eat
of thy holy supper. [92]

Where I should keep my mind from all filthy lusts, and my body from all
uncleanness, O Lord, I have defiled both, and made my heart a cage of
all impure thoughts, and my mind a very sty of the unclean spirit. [93]

Where I should have lived in uprightness, giving every man his due,
being contented with mine own estate, and living conscionably in my
lawful calling; should be ready, according to my ability, to lend and
give unto the poor, O Lord, I have, by oppression, extortion, bribes,
cavillation, and other indirect dealings, under pretence of my calling
and office, robbed and purloined from my fellow-Christians; yea, I have
deceived and suffered Christ, where was trusted, many a time, in his
poor members, to stand hungry, cold, and naked, at my door, and hungry,
cold, and naked, to go away succourless, as he came; and when the
leanness of his cheeks pleaded pity, the hardness of my heart would
shew no compassion. [94]

Where I should have made conscience to speak the truth in simplicity,
without any falsehood, prudently judging aright, and charitably
construing all things in the best part, and should have defended the
good name and credit of my neighbour; alas! vile wretch that I am! I
have belied and slandered my fellow-brother; and as soon as I heard an
ill report, I made my tongue the instrument of the devil, to blazon
that abroad to others, before I knew the truth of it myself. I was so
far from speaking a good word in defence of his good name, that it
tickled my heart in secret to hear one that I envied to be taxed with
such a blemish, though I knew that otherwise the graces of God shined
in him in abundant measure. I made jests of officious, and advantage of
pernicious lies; herein shewing myself a right Cretian, rather than an
upright Christian. [95]

And lastly, O Lord, where I should have rested fully contented with
that portion which thy majesty thought meetest to bestow upon me in
this pilgrimage, and rejoiced in another's good as in mine own; alas!
my life hath been nothing else but a greedy lusting after this
neighbour's house, and that neighbour's land; yea, secretly wishing
such a man dead, that I might have his living or office; coveting those
things which thou hast bestowed on another, rather than being thankful
for that which thou hast given unto myself. [96] Thus I, O Lord, who am
a carnal sinner, and sold under sin, have transgressed all thy holy and
spiritual commandments, from the first to the last, from the greatest
to the least; and here I stand guilty before thy judgment-seat, of all
the breaches of all thy laws, and therefore liable to thy curse, and to
all the miseries that justice can pour forth upon so cursed a creature.
And whither shall I go for deliverance from this misery? Angels blush
at my rebellion, and will not help me: men are guilty of the like
transgression, and cannot help themselves. Shall I, then, despair with
Cain, or make away myself with Judas? No, Lord; for that were but to
end the miseries of this life, and to begin the endless torments of
hell. I will rather appeal to thy throne of grace, where mercy reigns
to pardon abounding sins; and out of the depth of my miseries, I will
cry, with David, for the depth of thy mercies. Though thou shouldst
kill me with afflictions, yet will I, like Job, put my trust in thee.
Though thou shouldst drown me in the sea of thy displeasure, with
Jonas, yet will I catch such hold on thy mercy, that I will be taken up
dead, clasping her with both my hands. And though thou shouldst cast me
into the bowels of hell, as Jonas into the belly of the whale, yet from
thence would I cry unto thee, "O God, the Father of heaven, O Jesus
Christ, the Redeemer of the world, O Holy Ghost, my sanctifier, three
persons, and one eternal God, have mercy upon me, a miserable sinner!"
And seeing the goodness of thine own nature first moved thee to send
thine only-begotten Son to die for my sins, that by his death I might
be reconciled to thy majesty, O reject not now my penitent soul, who
being displeased with herself for sin, desireth to return, serve, and
please thee in newness of life; and reach from heaven thy helping hand
to save me, thy poor servant, who am, like Peter, ready to sink in the
sea of my sins and misery. Wash away the multitude of my sins with the
merits of that blood which I believe that thou hast so abundantly shed
for penitent sinners.

And now that I am to receive this day the blessed sacrament of thy
precious body and blood, O Lord, I beseech thee, let thy Holy Spirit,
by thy sacrament, seal unto my soul, that by the merits of thy death
and passion, all my sins are so freely and fully remitted and forgiven,
that the curses and judgments which my sins have deserved, may never
have power either to confound me in this life, or to condemn me in the
world which is to come. For my steadfast faith is, that thou hast died
for my sins, and risen again for my justification (Rom. iv. 25.) This I
believe; O Lord, help my unbelief. Work in me likewise, I beseech thee,
an unfeigned repentance, that I may heartily bewail my former sins, and
loath them, and serve thee henceforth in newness of life, and greater
measure of holy devotion; and let my soul never forget the infinite
love of so sweet a Saviour, that hath laid down his life to redeem so
vile a sinner. And grant, Lord, that having received these seals and
pledges of my communion with thee, thou mayest henceforth so dwell by
thy Spirit in me, and I so live by faith in thee, that I may carefully
walk all the days of my life in godliness and piety towards thee, and
in Christian love and charity towards all my neighbours: that living in
thy fear, I may die in thy favour, and after death be made partaker of
eternal life, through Jesus Christ, my Lord and only Saviour. Amen.

3. Of the Means whereby thou mayest become a worthy Receiver.

These means are duties of two sorts; the former respecting God, the
latter, our neighbour. Those which respect God are three--First, Sound
knowledge; secondly, True faith; thirdly, Unfeigned repentance. That
which respecteth our neighbour is but one, sincere charity.

(1.) Of sound Knowledge, requisite in a worthy Communicant.

Sound knowledge is a sanctified understanding of the first, principles
of religion: As first, Of the trinity of persons in the unity of the
Godhead; secondly, Of the creation of man, and his fall; thirdly, Of
the curse and misery due to sin; fourthly, Of the nature and offices of
Christ, and redemption by faith in his death, especially of the
doctrine of the sacraments, sealing the same unto us (Heb. vi. 1, 2;
John xvii. 3; 1 Tim. ii. 4; 2 Cor. xiii. 5.) For as an house cannot be
built unless the foundation be first laid, so no more can religion
stand, unless it be first grounded upon the certain knowledge of God's
word. Secondly, if we know not God's will, we can neither believe nor
do the same. For as worldly businesses cannot be done but by them who
have skill in them, so without knowledge must men be much more ignorant
in divine and spiritual matters. And yet in temporal things a man may
do much by the light of nature: but in religious mysteries, the more we
rely upon natural reason, the further we are from comprehending
spiritual truth (1 Cor. ii. 14; Rom. viii. 7;)--which discovers the
fearful state of those who receive without knowledge, and the more
fearful state of those pastors who minister to them without
catechising.

(2.) Of sincere Faith, required to make a worthy Communicant.

Sincere faith is not a bare knowledge of the Scriptures and first
grounds of religion--for that devils and reprobates have in an
excellent measure, and do believe it and tremble (James ii. 19)--but a
true persuasion, as of all those things whatsoever the Lord hath
revealed in his word; so also a particular application to a man's own
soul, of all the promises of mercy which God hath made in Christ to all
believing sinners (Heb. iv. 2;) and consequently, that Christ and all
his merits do belong to him, as well as to any other;--for first, if we
have not the righteousness of faith (Rom. iv. 11), the sacrament seals
nothing to us, and every man in the Lord's Supper receiveth so much as
he believeth; secondly, because that without faith we communicating on
earth, cannot apprehend Christ in heaven, for as he dwelleth in us by
faith (Eph. iii. 17), so by faith we must likewise eat him; thirdly,
because that without faith we cannot be persuaded in our consciences
that our receiving is acceptable unto God (Heb. xi. 6; Rom. xiv. 23.)

(3.) Of unfeigned Repentance requisite for a true Communicant.

True repentance is a holy change of the mind, when upon the feeling
sight of God's mercy, and of a man's own misery, he turneth from all
his known and secret sins, to serve God in holiness and righteousness
all the rest of his days (Isa. lv. 7; Ezek. xxxiii. 11; Acts xxvi. 29;
iii. 19; Luke i. 74, 75:) for as he that is glutted with meat is not
apt to eat bread, so he that is stuffed with sins, is not fit to
receive Christ (Heb. ii. 13, 14; Tit. i. 15;) and a conscience defiled
with wilful filthiness, makes the use of all holy things unholy to us.
Our sacrificed spotless Passover cannot be eaten with the sour leaven
of malice and wickedness, saith Paul (1 Cor. v. 8.) Neither can the old
bottles of our corrupt and impure consciences, retain the new wine of
Christ's precious blood, as our Saviour saith (Mark ii. 22.) We must
therefore truly repent, if we will be worthy partakers.

(4.) The Duty to be performed in respect of our neighbour is Charity.

Charity is a hearty forgiving of others who have offended us, and after
reconciliation, an outward unfeigned testifying of the inward
affections of our hearts by gestures, words, and deeds, as oft as we
meet, and occasion is offered;--for first, without love to our
neighbour, no sacrifice is acceptable to God (Matt. v. 23, 24;)
secondly, because one chief end wherefore the Lord's Supper was
ordained, is to confirm the love of Christians one towards another
(John xiii. 14, 34, 35;) thirdly, no man can assure himself that his
own sins are forgiven of God, if his heart cannot yield to forgive the
faults of men that have offended him (Matt. vi. 12, 14, 15; xviii. 35.)

Thus far of the first sort of duties which we are to perform before we
come to the Lord's table, called preparation.

II. Of the Second sort of Duties which a worthy Communicant is to
perform at the receiving of the Lord's Supper, called Meditation.

This exercise of spiritual meditation consists in divers points.

First, When the sermon is ended and the banquet of the Lord's Supper
begins to be celebrated, meditate with thyself how thou art invited by
Christ to be a guest at his holy table (Matt. xxii.), and how lovingly
he inviteth thee, "Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters
of life, &c. Come, buy wine and milk, without money and without price:
eat ye that which is good, let your soul delight itself in fatness."
(Isa. lv. 1, 2.) "Take ye, eat ye; this is my body which was broken for
you: drink ye all of this; for this is my blood which was shed for the
remission of your sins." (Matt. xxvi. 26, 27, 28, &c.) What greater
honour can be vouchsafed than to be admitted to sit at the Lord's own
table? what better fare can be afforded than to feed on the Lord's own
body and blood? If David thought it the greatest favour that he could
shew to good Barzillai, for all the kindness that he had shewn to him
in his troubles, to offer him that he should feed with him at his own
table in Jerusalem (2 Sam. xix. 33;) how much greater favour ought we
to account it when Christ doth indeed feed us in the church at his own
table, and that with his own most holy body and blood?

Secondly, As Abraham, when he went up to the mount, to sacrifice Isaac
his son, left his servants beneath in the valley (Gen. xxii. 5), so
when thou comest to the spiritual sacrifice of the Lord's Supper, lay
aside all earthly thoughts and cogitations, that thou mayest wholly
contemplate of Christ, and offer up thy soul unto him, who sacrificed
both his soul and body for thee.

Thirdly, Meditate with thyself how precious and venerable is the body
and blood, of the Son of God, who is the ruler of heaven and earth, the
Lord, at whose beck the angels tremble, and by whom both the quick" and
dead shall be judged at the last day, and thou among the rest: and that
it is he, who having been crucified for thy sins, offereth now to be
received by faith into thy soul. On the other side, consider how sinful
a creature thou art--how altogether unworthy of so holy a guest--how
ill-deserving to taste of such sacred food, having been conceived in
sin, and wallowing ever since in the mire of iniquity; bearing the name
of a Christian, but doing the works of the devil; adoring Christ with
an Ave Rex [97] in thy mouth, but spitting oaths in his face, and
crucifying him anew with thy graceless actions.

Fourthly, Ponder then with what face darest thou offer to touch so holy
a body with such defiled hands; or to drink such precious blood with so
lewd and lying a mouth; or to lodge so blessed a guest in so unclean a
stable? for if the Bethshemites were slain for but looking irreverently
into the Ark of the Old Testament, what judgments mayst thou justly
expect, who with such impure eyes and heart art come to see and receive
the Ark of the New Testament, in which dwelleth all the fulness of the
Godhead bodily (Col. ii. 3, 9.)

If Uzza, for but touching, though not without zeal, the Ark of the
Covenant, was stricken with sudden death (2 Sam. vi. 7), what stroke of
divine judgment mayst thou not fear, that so rudely, with unclean
hands, dost presume to handle the Ark of the eternal testament, wherein
are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge?

If John Baptist, the holiest man that was born of a woman, thought
himself unworthy to bear his shoes (Matt. iii. 11), how unworthy is
such a profane wretch as thou art, to eat his holy flesh and to drink
his precious blood?

If the blessed Apostle St. Peter, seeing but a glimpse of Christ's
almighty power, thought himself unworthy to stand in the same boat with
him, how unworthy art thou to sit with Christ at the same table, where
thou mayest behold the infiniteness of his grace and mercy displayed?

If the centurion thought that the roof of his house was not worthy to
harbour so divine a guest (Matt. viii. 8), what room can there be fit
under thy ribs for Christ's holiness to dwell in?

If the blood-issued sick woman feared to touch the hem of his garment,
how shouldst thou tremble to eat his flesh, and to drink his
all-healing blood?

Yet if thou comest humbly, in faith, repentance, and charity, abhorring
thy sins past, and purposing un-feignedly to amend thy life henceforth,
let not thy former sins affright thee, for they shall never be laid to
thy charge: and this sacrament shall seal unto thy soul, that all thy
sins and the judgments due to them, are fully pardoned and clean washed
away by the blood of Christ. For this sacrament was not ordained for
them who are perfect, but to help penitent sinners unto perfection:
Christ came not to call the righteous but sinners to repentance; and he
saith, that the whole need not the physician, but they that are sick
(Matt. ix. 12, 13; xi. 28.) Those hath Christ called, and when they
came them hath he ever helped. Witness the whole gospel, which
testifieth, that not one sinner who came to Christ for mercy, ever went
away without his errand. Bathe thou likewise thy sick soul in this
fountain of Christ's blood, and doubtless, according to his promise
(Zech. xiii. 1), thou shalt be healed of all thy sins and uncleanness.
Not sinners, therefore, but they who are unwilling to repent of their
sins, are debarred this sacrament.

Fifthly, Meditate that Christ left this sacrament to ns, as the chief
token and pledge of his love; not when we would have made him a king
(John vi. 15), which might have seemed a requital of kindness, but when
Judas and the high-priests were conspiring his death,--therefore wholly
of his mere favour. When Nathan would shew David how entirely the poor
man loved his sheep that was killed by the rich man, he gave her, saith
he, to eat of his own morsels, and of his own cup to drink (2 Sam. xii.
3;) and must not then the love of Christ to his church be unspeakable,
when he gives her his own flesh to eat, and his own blood to drink, for
her spiritual and eternal nourishment? If, then, there be any love in
thy heart, take the cup of salvation into thy hand, and pledge his love
with love again (Psal. cxvi. 11.)

Sixthly, When the minister begins the holy consecration of the
sacrament, then lay aside all praying, reading, and all other
cogitations whatsoever, and settle thy meditations only upon those holy
actions and rites, which, according to Christ's institution, are used
in and about the holy sacrament: for it hath pleased God, considering
our weakness, to appoint those rites, as means the better to lift up
our minds to the serious contemplation of his heavenly graces.

When, therefore, thou seest the minister putting apart bread and wine
on the Lord's table, and consecrating them by prayer and the rehearsal
of Christ's institution to be a holy sacrament of the blessed body and
blood of Christ; then meditate how God the Father, of his mere lore to
mankind, set apart and sealed his only-begotten Son, to be the
all-sufficient means, and only Mediator, to redeem us from sin, and to
reconcile us to his grace, and to bring us to his glory.

When thou seest the minister break the bread, being blessed, thou must
meditate that Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of God, was put to death,
and his blessed soul and body, with the sense of God's anger, broken
asunder for thy sins, as verily as thou now seest the holy sacrament to
be broken before thine eyes; and withal call to mind the heinousness of
thy sins, and the greatness of God's hatred against the same: seeing
God's justice could not be satisfied but by such a sacrifice.

When the minister hath blessed and broken the sacrament, and is
addressing himself to distribute it, then meditate, that the King, who
is the master of the feast, stands at the table to see his guests
(Matt. xxii. 11), and looketh upon thee whether thou hast on thee thy
wedding garment; [98] think also that all the holy angels that attend
upon the elect in the church (1 Cor. xi. 10), and do desire to behold
the celebration of these holy mysteries (1 Pet. i. 12), do observe thy
reverence and behaviour. Let thy soul, therefore, whilst the minister
bringeth the sacrament unto thee, offer this or the like short
soliloquy unto Christ:--
