<p>
  <a class="prev" href="23.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="25.html">Next</a>
</p>

## A sweet Soliloquy to be said between the Consecration and receiving of the Sacrament.

Is it true indeed, that God will dwell on earth? Behold the heaven, and
the heaven of heavens are not able to contain thee; how much more
unable is the soul of such a sinful caitiff as I am to receive thee?

But seeing it is thy blessed pleasure to come thus to sup with me, and
to dwell in me, I cannot fox joy but burst out and say, "What is man,
that thou art so mindful of him, and the son of man, that thou so
regardest him?" what favour soever thou vouchsafest me in the abundance
of thy grace, I will freely confess what I am in the wretchedness of my
nature. I am, in a word, a carnal creature whose very soul is sold
under sin: a wretched man, compassed about with a body of death. Yet,
Lord, seeing thou callest sinners, I have thrust myself in among the
rest; and seeing thou callest all with their heaviest loads, I see no
reason why I should stay behind. O Lord, I am sick, and whither should
I go, but unto thee, the physician of my soul; thou hast cured many,
but never didst thou meet with a more miserable patient, for I am more
leprous than Gehazi, more unclean than Magdalene, more blind in soul
than Bartimeus was in body; for I have lived all this while, and never
seen the true light of thy word. My soul overflows with sin.
Mephibosheth was not more lame to go, than my soul is to walk after
thee in love. Jeroboam's arm was not more withered to strike the
prophet, than my hand is maimed to relieve the poor. Cure me, O Lord,
and thou shalt do as great a work as in curing them all. And though I
have all their sins and sores, yet, Lord, so abundant is thy grace, so
great is thy skill, that if thou wilt, thou canst with a word forgive
the one and heal the other; and why should I doubt of thy good will,
when to save me will cost thee now but one loving smile; who didst shew
thyself so willing to redeem me, though it should cost thee all thy
heart-blood; and now offerest so graciously unto me the assured pledge
of my redemption by thy blood. Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my
merit, that thou hast bought me with so dear a price? (2 Sam. vii. 18.)
It is merely thy mercy, and I, O Lord, am not worthy of the least of
all thy mercies (Gen. xxxii. 10;) much less to be a partaker of this
holy sacrament, the greatest pledge of the greatest mercy, than ever
thou didst bestow upon those sons of men whom thou lovest. How might I,
in respect of my own unworthiness, cry out for fear at the sight of thy
holy sacrament, as the Philistines did, when they saw the ark of God
come into the assembly (1 Sam. v. 7.) Woe now unto me, a sinner! but
that thy angel doth comfort me, as he did the woman, "Fear thou not,
for I know that thou seekest Jesus which was crucified." (Matt. xxviii.
5.) It is thou indeed that my soul seeketh after; and here thou
offerest thyself unto me in thy blessed sacrament. If, therefore,
Elizabeth thought herself so much honoured at thy presence in the womb
of thy blessed mother, that the "babe sprang in her for joy," how
should my soul leap within me for joy, now that thou comest by thy holy
sacrament, to dwell in my heart for ever? O what an honour is this, not
that the mother of my Lord, but my Lord himself, should come thus to
visit me; indeed, Lord, I confess with the faithful centurion, that I
am not worthy that thou shouldst come under my roof: and that if thou
didst but speak the word only, my soul shall be saved; yet seeing it
hath pleased thee, in the riches of thy grace, for the better
strengthening of my weakness, to seal thy mercy unto me, by thy visible
sign, as well as by thy visible word; in all thankful humility my soul
speaks unto thee with the blessed Virgin: "Behold the handmaid of the
Lord; be it unto me according to thy word." Knock thou, Lord, by thy
word and sacraments, at the door of my heart; and I will, like the
publican, with both my fists knock at my breast, as fast as I can, that
thou mayest enter in; and if the door will not open fast enough, break
it open, O Lord, by thine almighty power, and then enter in, and dwell
there for ever, that I may have cause with Zaccheus to acknowledge that
"this day salvation is come into mine house." And cast out of me
whatsoever shall be offensive unto thee; for I resign the whole
possession of my heart unto thy sacred Majesty, entreating that I may
not live henceforth, but that thou mayest live in me, speak in me, walk
in me, and so govern me by thy Spirit, that nothing may be pleasing to
me, but that which is acceptable unto thee; that finishing my course in
the life of grace, I may afterwards live with thee for ever in the
kingdom of glory. Grant this, O Lord Jesus, for the merits of thy death
and blood-shedding. Amen.

When the minister bringeth towards thee the bread thus blessed and
broken, and offering it to thee, bids thee, take, eat, &c., then
meditate, that Christ himself cometh unto thee, and both offereth, and
giveth indeed unto thy faith, his very body and blood, with all the
merits of his death and passion, to feed thy soul unto eternal life; as
surely as the minister offereth and giveth the outward signs, that feed
thy body unto this temporal life. The bread of the Lord is given by the
minister, but the bread which is the Lord is given by Christ himself.

When thou takest the bread at the minister's hand to eat it, [99] then
rouse up thy soul to apprehend Christ by faith, and to apply his merits
to heal thy miseries. Embrace him as sweetly with thy faith in the
sacrament, as ever Simeon hugged him with his arms in his swaddling
clothes.

As thou eatest the bread, imagine that thou seest Christ hanging upon
the cross, and by his unspeakable torments, fully satisfying God's
justice for thy sins; and strive to be as verily partaker of the
spiritual grace, as of the elemental signs; for the truth is not absent
from the sign; neither doth Christ deceive, when he saith, "This is my
body:" he giveth himself indeed to every soul that spiritually receives
him by faith; for as ours is the same supper which Christ administered,
so is the same Christ verily present at his own supper, not by any
papal transubstantiation, but by a sacramental participation, [100]
whereby he doth truly feed the faithful unto eternal life; not by
coming down out of heaven unto thee, but by lifting thee up from the
earth unto him, according to that old saying, Sursum corda, lift up
your hearts. And "where the carcase is, thither will the eagles
resort."

When thou seest the wine brought to thee apart from the bread, then
remember that the blood of Jesus Christ was as verily separated from
his body upon the cross, for the remission of thy sins; and that this
is the seal of the new covenant, which God hath made to forgive all the
sins of all penitent sinners that believe in the merits of his
blood-shedding; for the wine is not a sacrament of Christ's blood
contained in his veins; but as it was shed out of his body upon the
cross for the remission of the sins of all that believe on him.

As thou drinkest the wine, meditate and believe, that by the merits of
that blood which Christ shed upon the cross, all thy sins are as verily
forgiven, as thou hast now drunk this sacramental wine, and received it
in faith. And in the instant of drinking, settle thy meditation upon
Christ, as he hanged upon the cross, as if, like Mary and John, thou
didst see him nailed, and his blood running down his blessed side out
of that ghastly wound which the spear made in his innocent heart;
wishing thy mouth close to his side, that thou mightst receive that
precious blood before it fell to the dusty earth. And yet the actual
drinking of that real blood with thy mouth, would be nothing so
effectual as this sacramental drinking of that blood spiritually by
faith (Matt. xxvi. 28.) For one of the soldiers might have drunk that,
and-been still a reprobate; but whosoever drinketh it spiritually by
faith in the sacrament, shall surely have the remission of his sins,
and life everlasting. [101]

As thou feelest the sacramental wine which thou hast drunk, warming thy
cold stomach, so endeavour to feel the Holy Ghost cherishing thy soul
in the joyful assurance of the forgiveness of all thy sins, by the
merit of the blood of Christ. And to this end God giveth every faithful
soul, together with the sacramental blood, the Holy Ghost to drink: "We
are all made to drink into one spirit." (1 Cor. xii. 13.) And so lift
up thy mind from the contemplation of Christ-, as he was crucified upon
the cross, to consider how he now sits in glory at the right hand of
his Father, making intercession for thee (Rom. viii. 34; Heb. vii. 25;
ix. 24), by presenting to his Father the invaluable merits of his
death, which he once suffered for thee, to appease his justice for the
sins which thou dost daily commit against him.

After thou hast eaten and drunk both the bread and wine, labour that as
those sacramental signs turn to the nourishment of thy body, and by the
digestion of heat become one with thy substance, so by the operation of
faith and the Holy Ghost thou mayest become one with Christ, and Christ
with thee; and so mayest feel thy communion with Christ confirmed and
increased daily more and more (1 Cor. x. 17.) [102] That as it is
impossible to separate the bread and wine digested into the blood and
substance of thy body, so it may be more impossible to part Christ from
thy soul, or thy soul from Christ.

Lastly, as the bread of the sacrament, though con-fected of many
grains, yet makes but one bread, so must thou remember that though all
the faithful are many, yet are they all but one mystical body, whereof
Christ is head. And therefore thou must love every Christian as
thyself, and a member of thy body.

Thus far of the duties to be done at the receiving of the holy
sacrament, called meditation.

[78] David calls bread the strength of man's heart (Psal. civ. 15;)
Isaiah, the stay of bread (ch. iii. 1;) Ezekiel, the staff of bread
(ch. iv. 16;) Homer, Muelos andron.

[79] Incruentum sacrificium. If it be unbloody, because it is void of
blood, then it is not Christ's natural body: if because it is offered
without shedding of blood, then it is not available for the remission
of sins (Heb. ix. 22.)

[80] Audio quid verba sonent, neque enim mortis tantum ac
resurrectionis suæ beneficium nobis offert Christus, sed corpus ipsum
in quo passus est ac resurrexit. Concludo, realiter, hoc est vere nobis
in coeena dari Ckristi corpus, ut sit animis nostris in eibum
salutarem.--Calv. in Com. in 1 Cor. xi. 25.

[81] Quod se nobis communicat, id sit arcanâ spiritus sancti virtute,
quæ res locorum distantiâ sejunctas, ac procul dissitas non modo
aggregare, sed coadunare in unum potest.--Calv. ibid.

[82] Corpus non adest, cum pane, hama, id est, simul loco, sed homou,
id est, simul tempore.

[83] Quum coena coelestis sit actio, minime absurdum est Christum in
coelo manentem à nobis recipi.--Calv. in 1 Cor. xi. 25.

[84] Fidem mitte in coelum, et eum in terris tanquam præsentem
tenuisti.--Aug. Ep. iii. ad Vol. Fidem quum dico; non intelligo
quamlibet opinionem, sed fiduciam qua quum audis panem tesseram esse
corporis Christi, non dubitas impleri à Domino, quod verba sonant:
corpus quod nequaquam cernis, spirituale esse tibi alimentum, vinque ex
Christi carne vivificam in nos per spiritum diffundi.--Calv. ibid.

[85] Ego tunc nos demum participare Christi bonis agnosco postquam
Christum ipsum obtinemus. Obtinetur non tantum quum pro nobis factum
fuisse victimam credimus: sed dum in nobis habitat, dum ejus sumus
membra, ex came ejus, dum in unam denique et vitam et substantiam (ut
ita loquar.) cum ipso coalescimus.--Calv. in 1 Cor. xi. 25.

[86] Milites sacramento erant jurati et obstricti ad præstandam soli
imperitori fidelitatem et obedientiam.

[87] The first commandment.

[88] The second commandment.

[89] The third commandment.

[90] The fourth commandment.--Here confess thy travelling on the
Sabbath, and thy leaving the holy exercise to go to sporting or
feasting.

[91] The fifth commandment.--Here confess thy disobedience to thy
parents, ministers, magistrates, masters, or tutors.

[92] The sixth commandment.--Here confess thy hastiness and fury, and
if thou hast been any way the cause of any man's death unjustly or
cruelly.

[93] The seventh commandment--Here confess unto God thy secret
pollutions, fornication, or adultery, if Satan hath so far prevailed
over thee.

[94] The eighth commandment.--Here confess if thou hast secretly
stolen, or openly robbed anything, or hast detained from any fatherless
child that which is his by right.

[95] The ninth commandment.--Here confess if thou hast belied or
slandered thy neighbour, or not spoken the truth to clear his
innocency, when thou wast called thereto.

[96] The tenth commandment.

[97] Hail, King!

[98] This wedding garment is righteousness and true holiness (Rev. xix.
8: Eph. iv. 24.)

[99] Sacramentum requirit sacram mentem.

[100] Christ calls it his body, not the sign of his body, because this
sacrament was instituted not only to signify, but also to communicate
the spiritual graces that it represents, and by the signs to draw our
minds to the graces signified. So Euthymius, in Matt. xxvi.--"Non dixit
dominus, Hæc sunt signa corporis mei, sed hoc est corpus meum. Oportet
ergo, non ad naturam eorum quæ proposita sunt aspicere, sed ad ipsorum
virtutem et gratiam. Non hoc corpus quod videtis manducaturi estis, et
bibituri illum sanguinem quem fusuri sunt qui me crucifigent.
Sacramentum aliquid vobis commendo; spiritualiter intellectum
vivificabit vos."--Aug. in Psal. xcviii., speaking in the person of
Christ. The disciples did not eat Christ corporally and substantially
in the first institution; no more do we in the reiteration of the same
supper.

[101] If remission of sins and eternal life had been appropriated to
the drinking of the real blood, doubtless John and Mary would have made
means to have drunk it; but John ascribes the virtue to believing that
it was shed.

[102] Unus est panis communi notione sacramenti, non autem necessario
unus numero.

III. Of the Duties which we are to perform after receiving the holy
Communion, called Action or Practice.

The duty which we are to perform after the receiving of the Lord's
Supper is called action or practice, without which all the rest will
minister to us no comfort.

The action consists of two sorts of duties:---First, Such as we are to
perform in the church, or else after we are gone home.

Those that we are to perform in the church are either several from our
own souls, or else jointly with the congregation.

The several duties which thou must perform from thine own soul are
three:--First, Thou must be careful that forasmuch as Christ now
dwelleth in thee, therefore, to entertain him in a clean heart, and
with pure affections (Psal. xviii. 26), [103] for the most Holy will be
holy with the holy; for if Joseph of Arimathea, when he had begged of
Pilate his dead body to bury it, wrapped it in sweet odours and fine
linen, and laid it in a new tomb, how much more shouldst thou lodge
Christ in a new heart, and perfume his rooms with the odoriferous
incense of prayers, and all pure affections? If God required Moses to
provide a pot of pure gold to keep the manna that fell in the
wilderness, what a pure heart shouldst thou provide to receive this
divine manna that is come down from heaven?

And as thou earnest sorrowing, like Joseph and Mary, to seek Christ in
the temple, so now having there found him in the midst 6f his word and
sacraments, be careful with joy to carry him home with thee as they
did.

And if the man that found but his lost sheep rejoiced so much, how
canst thou, having found the Saviour of the world, but rejoice much
more?

Secondly, Thou must offer the sacrifice of a private thanksgiving to
God for this inestimable grace and mercy; for as this action is common
to the whole church, so is it applied particularly to every one of the
faithful in the church; and for this particular mercy every soul must
joyfully offer up a particular sacrifice of thanksgiving. For if the
wise men rejoiced so much when they saw the star which conducted them
to Christ, and worshipped him so devoutly when he lay a babe in the
manger, and offered unto him their gold, myrrh, and frankincense, how
much more shouldst thou rejoice, now that thou hast both seen and
received this sacrament which guideth thy soul unto him where he
sitteth at the right hand of his Father in glory? And thither, lifting
up thy heart, adore him, and offer up unto him the gold of a pure
faith, the myrrh of a mortified heart, and this or the like sweet
incense of prayer and thanksgiving:--

<p>
  <a class="prev" href="23.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="25.html">Next</a>
</p>
