## A Prayer to be said after the receiving of the Communion.

What shall I render unto thee, O blessed Saviour, for all these
blessings which thou hast so graciously bestowed upon my soul? How can
I sufficiently thank thee when I can scarce express them? Where thou
mightest have made me a beast, thou madest me a man after thine own
image. When by sin I had lost both thine image and myself, thou didst
renew in me thine image by thy Spirit, and didst redeem my soul again
by thy blood; and now thou hast given unto me the seal and pledge of my
redemption, nay, thou hast given thyself unto me, O blessed Redeemer. O
what an inestimable treasure of riches, and overflowing fountain of
grace hath he got who hath gained thee! No man ever touched thee by
faith but thou didst heal him by grace; for thou art the author of
salvation, the remedy of all evils, the medicine of the sick, the life
of the quick, and the resurrection of the dead. Seemed it a small
matter unto thee to appoint thy holy angels to attend upon so vile a
creature as I am; but that thou shouldest enter thyself into my soul,
there to preserve, nourish, and cherish me unto life everlasting?

If the carcase of the dead prophet could revive a dead man that touched
it, how much more shall the living body of the Lord of all prophets
quicken the faithful, in whose heart he dwelleth? And if thou wilt
raise my body at the last day out of the dust, how much more wilt thou
now revive my soul which thou hast sanctified with thy Spirit, and
purified with thy blood? O Lord, what could I more desire, or what
couldst thou more bestow upon me than to give me thy body for meat, thy
blood for drink, and to lay down thy soul for the price of my
redemption? Thou, Lord, enduredst the pain, and I do reap the profit; I
received pardon, and thou didst bear the punishment. Thy tears were my
bath, thy wounds my weal, and the injustice done to thee, satisfied for
the judgment which was due to me. Thus by thy birth thou art become my
brother, by thy death my ransom, by thy mercy my reward, and by thy
sacrament my nourishment. O divine food, by which the sons of men are
transformed into the sons of God; so that man's nature dieth, and God's
nature liveth and ruleth in us! Indeed all creatures wondered that the
Creator would be enclosed nine months in the virgin's womb. But that
thou shouldst thus humble thyself to dwell for ever in my heart, which
thou foundest more unclean than a dung-hill, it is able to make all the
creatures in Heaven and earth to stand amazed. But seeing it is thy
free grace and mere pleasure thus to enter and to dwell in my heart, I
would to God that I had so pure a heart as my heart could wish to
entertain thee. And who is fit to entertain Christ? Or who, though
invited, would not choose with Mary rather to kneel at thy feet, than
presume to sit with thee at thy table? Though I want a pure heart for
thee to dwell in, yet weeping eyes shall never be wanting to wash thy
blessed feet, and to lament my filthy sins. And, albeit, I cannot weep
so many tears as may suffice to wash thy holy feet; yet, Lord, it is
sufficient that thou hast shed blood enough to cleanse my sinful soul.
And I am fully, O Lord, assured, that all the dainty fare wherewith the
disdainful Pharisee entertained thee at his table, did not so much
please thee as those tears which penitent Mary poured under the table.
I would therefore wish with Jeremiah, that "my head were a fountain of
tears;" that seeing I can by no means yield sufficient thanks for thy
love to me, yet I might by continual tears testify my love unto thee.
And though no man is worthy of so infinite a grace, yet this is my
comfort, that he is worthy whom thou in favour accountest worthy. And
seeing that now of thy mere grace thou hast counted me among others,
thy chosen, worthy of this unspeakable favour, and sealed by thy
sacrament, the assurance of thy love and the forgiveness of my sins, O
Lord, confirm thy favour unto thy servant, and say of me as Isaac did
of Jacob, "I have blessed him, therefore he shall be blessed." And that
I may say unto thee with David, "Thou, O Lord, hast blessed my soul,
and made it thy house, and it shall be blessed for ever." And seeing it
pleased thee to bless the house of Obed-edom and all his household,
whilst the ark of the Lord remained in his house, I doubt not but thou
wilt much more bless my soul and body, and all that do belong unto me,
now that it hath pleased thy majesty of thine own good will to enter
under my roof, and to dwell for ever in my poor cottage. Bless me, O
Lord, so that my sins may wholly be remitted by thy blood, my
conscience sanctified by thy Spirit, my mind enlightened by thy truth,
my heart guided by thy Spirit, and my will, in all things, subdued to
thy blessed will and pleasure. Bless me with all graces which I want,
and increase in me those good gifts which thou hast already bestowed
upon me. And seeing that I hold thee not by the arms, as Jacob
wrestling, without me, but inwardly dwelling by faith within me,
surely, Lord, I will never let thee go except thou bless me, and give
me a new name, a new heart, a new spirit, and strength by the power of
God to prevail over sin and Satan. And I beseech thee, O Lord, desire
not to depart from me, as thou didst from Jacob, because the day
breaketh, and thy grace beginneth to dawn and appear; but I, from my
soul, humbly, with the disciples at Emmaus, entreat thee, O sweet
Jesus, to abide with me because it draweth toward night; for the night
of temptation, the night of tribulation, yea, my last long night of
death approacheth. O blessed Saviour, stay with me therefore now and
ever. And if thy presence go not home with me, carry me not from hence.
Go with me and live with me; and let neither death nor life separate me
from thee. Drive me from myself; draw me unto thee. Let me be sick, but
sound in thee; and in my weakness let thy strength appear. Let me seem
as dead, that thou alone mayest be seen to live in me, so that all my
members may be but instruments to act thy motions. Set me as a seal
upon thine heart (Cant. viii. 6;) and let thy zeal be settled upon
mine, that I may be out of all love with all, that I may be only in
love with thee. And grant, O Lord, that as thou now vouchsafest me this
favour to sit at thy table, to receive this sacrament in thy house of
grace, so I may hereafter, through thy mercy, be received to eat and
drink at thy table in thy kingdom of glory. And for thy mercy I do
here, with the four beasts and twenty-four elders, cast myself down
before thy throne of grace, acknowledging that it is thou that hast
redeemed me with thy blood, and that salvation cometh only from thee.
And therefore unto thee I do yield all praise, and glory, and wisdom,
and thanks, and honour, and power, and might, and majesty, O my Lord
and my God, for evermore. Amen.

Thirdly, Seeing Christ hath sacrificed himself for thee, and all that
thou canst give is too little, therefore thou must offer thyself to be
a living, holy, and acceptable sacrifice unto God, by serving him in
righteousness and holiness all thy days. Thus Tertullian witnesseth
that in his time a Christian was known from another man, only by the
holiness and uprightness of his life.

2. Of the Duties which we are to do after the Communion, jointly with
the congregation.

The duties to be performed jointly with the church are three: First,
Public thanksgiving, both by prayers, and singing of psalms (Matt.
xxvi. 30:) [104] thus Christ himself and his apostles did. Secondly,
Joining with the church, in giving (every man according to his ability)
towards the relief of the poor (1 Cor. xvi. 1; Rom. xv. 25:) this was
the manner of the primitive churches, to make collections and
love-feasts after the Lord's Supper, for the relief of the poor
Christians. Thirdly, When thanks and praise is ended, then with all
reverence to stand up, and to receive the blessing of God, by the mouth
of his minister; and to receive it, as if thou didst hear God himself
pronouncing it unto thee from heaven; for by their blessing God doth
bless his people (Numb. vi. 23, 27.)

Thus far of the duties to be practised in the Church.

The duties which thou art to practise after that thou art departed
home, are three: First, To observe diligently whether thou hast truly
received Christ in the sacrament; which thou mayest thus easily
perceive: for seeing his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink
indeed, and that he is so full of grace, that no man ever touched him
by faith, but he received virtue from him, it cannot possibly be, that
if thou hast eaten his flesh, or drunk his blood, but thou shalt
receive grace and power to be cleansed from thy sins and filthiness;
for if the woman that did but touch his garment was forthwith cured of
her disease that had continued so long, how much more will the plague
of thy sin be healed, if thou then hast truly eaten and drunk the very
flesh and blood of Christ? But if thy issue still runneth, thou mayest
justly suspect thou hast never yet truly touched Christ.

Secondly, Seeing thou hast now reconciled thyself to God, and renewed
thy covenant, and vowed newness and amendment of life, thou must
therefore have a special care, that thou dost not yield to commit thy
former sins any more; knowing that the unclean spirit, if ever he can
get into thy soul again, after that it is swept and garnished, will
enter forcible possession with seven other devils worse than himself;
so that the end of that man shall be worse than his beginning. Be ye
not therefore like the dog, that returns to his vomit, or the washed
sow that walloweth in the mire again. And return not to thy malice,
like the adder, who laying aside her poison while she drinks, and takes
it up again when she hath done. But when either the devil or thy flesh
shall offer to tempt and move thee to relapse into thy former sins,
answer them as the spouse doth in the Canticles, "I have put off my
coat" (of my former corruptions), "how shall I put it on? I have washed
my feet, how shall I defile them again?" (Cant. v. 3.)

Lastly, If ever thou hast found either joy or comfort in receiving the
holy sacrament, let it appear by thy eager desire of receiving it often
again. For the body of Christ, as it was anointed with the oil of
gladness above his fellows, so doth it yield a sweeter savour than all
the ointments of the world; the fragrant smell of which allureth all
souls who have once tasted its sweetness ever after to desire oftener
to taste of it again. "Because of the savour of thy good ointments,
therefore do the virgins love thee." (Cant. i. 3.) "O taste, therefore,
often, and see how good the Lord is," saith David. This is the
commandment of Christ himself, "Do this in remembrance of me;" and in
doing this, thou shalt shew thyself best mindful and thankful for his
death: "For as oft as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye
shall shew the Lord's death until he come." And let this be the chief
end to which both thy receiving and living tends,--that thou mayest be
a holy Christian, zealous of good works, purged from sin, to live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world; that thou mayest
be acceptable to God, profitable to thy brethren, and comfortable unto
thine own soul.

Thus far of the manner of glorifying God in thy life.

[103] Sancta non nisi sancte et sanctis.

[104] Which is probable to have been the 113th Psalm.
