<p>
  <a class="prev" href="25.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="27.html">Next</a>
</p>

## The Practice of Piety in Glorifying God in the Time of Sickness, and When Thou Art Called to Die in the Lord.

As soon as thou perceivest thyself to be visited with any sickness,
meditate with thyself:

1. That "misery cometh not forth of the dust; neither doth affliction
spring out of the earth." Sickness comes not by hap or chance (as the
Philistines supposed that their mice and emrods came, 1 Sam. vi. 9),
but from man's wickedness, which, as sparkles, breaketh out. "Man
suffereth," saith Jeremiah, "for his sins." "Fools," saith David, "by
reason of their transgressions, and because of their iniquities, are
afflicted." As, therefore, Solomon advises a man to carry himself
towards an earthly prince, "if the spirit of him that ruleth rise up
against thee leave not thy place, for gentleness pacifieth great sins;"
so counsel I thee to deal with the Prince of princes; if the Spirit of
Him that ruleth heaven and earth rise up against thee, let not thy
heart despair; for repentance pacifieth great sins. And "whosoever
returneth in his affliction to the Lord God of Israel, and seeks him,
he will be found of him." (2 Chron. xv. 4.)

2. Shut to thy chamber door (Matt. vi. 6;) examine thy own heart upon
thy bed (Psal. iv. 4;) search and try thy ways (Lam. iii. 40;) search
as diligently for thy capital sin as Joshua did for Achan, till thou
findest it (Josh. vii. 16, &c.) For albeit God, when he beginneth to
chasten his children, hath respect to all their sins, yet when his
anger is incensed, he chiefly taketh occasion to chasten, and enter
with them into judgment for some one grievous sin, in which they have
lived without repentance.

3. When thou hast thus considered all thy sins, put thyself before the
judgment-seat of God, as a felon or murderer standing at the bar of an
earthly judge; and with grief and sorrow of heart confess to God all
thy known sins, especially thy capital offences, wherewith God is
chiefly displeased. Lay them open, with all the circumstances of the
time, place, and manner how they were committed, as may most serve to
aggravate the heinousness of thy sins, and to shew the contrition of
thy heart for the same. Lift up thy hand, and acknowledge thyself
before the righteous Judge of heaven and earth, guilty of eternal death
and damnation for those thy heinous sins and transgressions. And having
thus accused and judged thyself, cast down thyself before the footstool
of his throne of grace (Heb. iv. 16), assuring thyself, that whatsoever
the kings of Israel be, yet the God of Israel is a merciful God (1
Kings xx. 31;) and cry unto him, from a penitent and faithful heart,
for mercy and forgiveness, as eagerly and earnestly as ever thou
knewest a malefactor, being to receive his sentence, cry unto the judge
for favour and pardon; vowing amendment of life, and, by the assistance
of his grace, never to commit the like sin any more. All which thou
mayest do in these or the like words:--

<p>
  <a class="prev" href="25.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="27.html">Next</a>
</p>
