## A Prayer when one begins to be sick.

O most righteous Judge, yet in Jesus Christ my gracious Father! I,
wretched sinner, do here return unto thee, though driven with pain and
sickness, like the prodigal child with want and hunger. I acknowledge
that this sickness and pain comes not by blind chance or fortune, but
by thy divine providence and special appointment. It is the stroke of
thy heavy hand, which my sins have justly deserved; and the things that
I feared are now fallen upon me (Job iii. 25.) Yet do I well perceive
that in wrath thou rememberest mercy (Hab. iii. 2), when I consider how
many and how heinous are my sins, and how few and easy are thy
corrections. Thou, mightest have stricken me with some fearful and
sudden death, whereby I should not have had either time or space to
have called upon thee for grace and mercy; and so should have perished
in my sins, and have been for ever condemned in hell.

But thou, O Lord, visitest me with such a fatherly chastisement, as
thou usest to visit thy dearest children whom thou best lovedst; giving
me, by this sickness, both warning and time to repent, and to sue unto
thee for grace and pardon. I take not, therefore, O Lord, this thy
visitation as any sign of thy wrath or hatred, but as an assured pledge
and token of thy favour and loving-kindness, whereby thou dost with thy
temporal judgments draw me to judge myself, and to repent of my wicked
life, that I should not be condemned with the godless and unrepentant
world. For thy holy word assures me, that "whom thou lovest, thou thus
chastenest; and that thou scourgest every son that thou receivest."
That if I endure thy chastening, thou offerest thyself unto me as unto
a son; and that all that continue in sin, and yet escape without
correction, whereof all thy children are partakers, are bastards and
not sons; and that thou chastenest me for my profit, that I may be a
partaker of thy holiness. O Lord, how full of goodness is thy nature,
that hast dealt with me so graciously in the time of my health and
prosperity; and now, being provoked by my sins and unthankfulness, hast
such fatherly and profitable ends in inflicting upon me this sickness
and correction!

I confess, Lord, that thou dost justly afflict my body with sickness,
for my soul was sick before of a long prosperity, and surfeited with
ease, peace, plenty, and fulness of bread. And now, O Lord, I lament
and mourn for my sins; "I acknowledge my wickedness, and my iniquities
are always in my sight." Oh what a wretched sinner am I, void of all
goodness by nature, and full of evil by sinful custom! Oh what a world
of sin have I committed against thee, whilst thy long-sufferance
expected ray conversion, and thy blessings wooed me to repentance! Yet,
O my God, seeing it is thy property more to respect the goodness of thy
own nature than the deserts of sinners, I beseech thee, O Father, for
thy Son Jesus Christ's sake, and for the merits of that all-saving
death which he hath voluntarily suffered for all who believe in him,
have mercy upon me, according to the multitude of thy mercies; turn thy
face away from my sins, and blot out all my iniquities: cast me not out
of thy presence, neither reward me according to my deserts: for if thou
dost reject me, who will receive me? Or who will succour me, if thou
dost forsake me? But thou, O Lord, art the helper of the helpless, and
in thee the fatherless findeth mercy (Hos. xiv. 3:) for though my sins
be exceeding great, yet thy mercy, O Lord, far exceedeth them all;
neither can I commit so many as thy grace can remit and pardon. Wash,
therefore, O Christ, my sins with the virtue of thy precious blood,
especially those sins which from a penitent heart I have confessed unto
thee; but chiefly, O Lord, forgive me. [105] And seeing that of thy
love thou didst lay down thy life for my ransom, when I was thine
enemy, O save now the price of thine own blood, when it shall cost thee
but a smile upon me, or a gracious appearance in thy Father's sight in
my behalf. Reconcile me once again, O merciful Mediator, unto thy
Father; for though there be nothing in me that can please him, yet I
know that in thee, and for thy sake, he is well pleased with all whom
thou acceptest and lovest. And if it be thy blessed will, remove this
sickness from me, and restore to me my former health again, that I may
live longer to set forth thy glory, and to be a comfort to my friends
who depend upon me, and to procure to myself a more settled assurance
of that heavenly inheritance which thou hast prepared for me. And then,
Lord, thou shalt see how religiously and wisely I shall redeem the
time, which heretofore I have so lewdly and profanely spent. And to the
end that I may the sooner and the easier be delivered from this pain
and sickness, direct me, O Lord, I beseech thee, by thy divine
providence, to such a physician and helper, as that, by thy blessing
upon the means, I may recover my former health and welfare again. And,
good Lord, vouchsafe, that as thou hast sent this sickness, to me, so
thou wouldst likewise be pleased to send thy Holy Spirit into my heart,
whereby this present sickness may be sanctified unto me; that I may use
it as thy school, wherein I may learn to know the greatness of my
misery and the riches of thy mercy; that I may be so humbled at the
one, that I despair not of the other; and that I may so renounce all
confidence of help in myself, or in any other creature, that I may only
put the whole rest of my salvation in thy all-sufficient merits. And
forasmuch as thou knowest, Lord, how weak a vessel I am, full of
frailty and imperfections, and that by nature I am angry and froward
under every cross and affliction, O Lord, who art the giver of all good
gifts, arm me with patience to endure thy blessed will and pleasure,
and of thy mercy lay no more upon me than I shall be able to endure and
suffer. Give me grace to behave myself in all patience, love, and
meekness, unto those that shall come and visit me; that I may
thankfully receive, and willingly embrace all good counsels and
consolations from them; and that they may likewise see in me such a
good example of patience, and hear from me such godly lessons of
comfort as may be arguments of my Christian faith and profession, and
instructions unto them how to behave themselves when it shall please
thee to visit them with the like, affliction of sickness. I know, O
Lord, I have deserved to die; and I desire not longer to live, than to
amend my wicked life, and in some better measure to set forth thy
glory. Therefore, O Father, if it be thy blessed will, restore me to
health again, and grant me a longer life. But if thou hast, according
to thy eternal decree, appointed by this sickness to call for me out of
this transitory life, I resign myself into thy hands, and holy
pleasure; thy blessed will be done, whether it be by life or by death.
Only I beseech thee of thy mercy forgive me all my sins, and prepare my
poor soul, that by a true faith and unfeigned repentance, she may be
ready against the time that thou shalt call for her out of my sick and
sinful body. O heavenly Father, who art the hearer of prayer, hear thou
in heaven this my prayer, and in this extremity grant me these
requests, not for any worthiness that is in me, but for the merits of
thy beloved Son Jesus, my only Saviour and Mediator, for whose sake
thou hast promised to hear us, and to grant whatsoever we shall ask of
thee in his name. In his name, therefore, and in his words, I conclude
this my imperfect supplication:--

"Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name," &c.
