Having thus reconciled thyself to God in Christ,

1. Let thy next care be to set thy house in order, as Isaiah advised
King Hezekiah, making thy last will and testament, if it be not already
made. If it be made, then peruse it, confirm it, and for avoiding all
doubts and contention, publish it before witnesses, that, if God call
for thee out of this life, it may stand in force and unalterable, as
thy last will and testament; and so deliver it locked or sealed up in
some box, to the keeping of a faithful friend, in the presence of
honest witnesses.

2. But in making thy testament, take a religious friend's advice how to
bestow thy benevolence, and some honest lawyer's counsel to continue it
according to law.

Dispatch this before thy sickness doth increase and thy memory decay;
lest otherwise thy testament prove a doatment, and so another man's
fancy rather than thy will.

3. To prevent many inconveniencies, let me recommend to thy discretion
two things:

(1.) If God have blessed thee with any competent state of wealth, make
thy will in thy health time. It will neither put thee farther from thy
goods, nor hasten thee sooner to thy death; but it will be a greater
ease to thy mind, in freeing thee from a great trouble when thou shalt
have most need of quiet: for when thy house is set in order thou shalt
be better enabled to set thy soul in order, and to dispose of thy
journey towards God.

(2.) If thou hast children, give to every one of them a portion,
according to thy ability, in thy lifetime, that thy life may seem an
ease, and not a yoke to them; yet so give, as that thy children may be
still beholden unto thee, and not thou unto them. But if thou keep all
in thy hands whilst thou livest, they may thank death and not thee, for
the portion that thou leavest them. If thou hast no children, and the
Lord hath blest thee with a great portion of the goods of this world,
and if thou meanest to bestow them upon any charitable or pious uses,
put not over that good work to the trust of others, seeing thou seest
how most of other men's executors prove almost executioners. And if
friends be so unfaithful in a man's life, how much greater cause hast
thou to distrust their fidelity after thy death? Lamentable experience
shews how many dead men's wills have of late either been quite
concealed, utterly overthrown, or by cavils and quirks of law
frustrated or altered; whereas, by the law of God, the will of the dead
should not be violated (Gal. iii. 15; Heb. ix. 17), but all his godly
intentions conscientiously performed and fulfilled, as in the sight of
God, who, in the day of the resurrection, will be a just judge both of
the quick and dead (2 Cor. v. 10; Eccl. xii. 14; Rom. ii. 15; 1 Cor.
iv. 5.) And if anything should hap in his will to be ambiguous or
doubtful, it should be construed as it might come nearest to the honour
of God and the honest intention of the testator: but let the vengeance
due to such unchristian deeds light on the actors that do them, not on
the kingdom wherein they are suffered to be done. And let other rich
men be warned by such wretched examples, not so to marry their minds to
their, money, as that they will do no good with their goods till death
divorces them. Considering, therefore, the shortness of thine own life,
and the uncertainty of the just dealing of others after thy death, in
these unjust days, let me advise thee, whom God hath blessed with
ability, and an intent to do good, to become in thy lifetime thine own
administrator; make thine own hands thy executors, and thine own eyes
thy overseers; cause thy lantern to give her light before thee, and not
behind thee; give God the glory, and thou shalt receive of him in due
time the reward which of his grace and mercy he hath promised to thy
good works (Gal. vi. 9; Matt. x. 42; xxv. 34, &c.; Mark. ix. 41; Luke
xiv. 14; xviii. 22; 1 Cor. xv. 58; Rev. xiv. 13.)

4. Having thus set thy house and soul in order--if the determined
number of thy days be not expired (Job xiv. 5)--God will either have
mercy upon thee, and say, Spare him, O killing malady, that he go not
down into the pit, for I have received a reconciliation (Job xxxiii.
24;) or else his fatherly providence will direct thee to such a
physician and to such means as, that by his blessing upon their
endeavours, thou shalt recover and be restored to thy former health
again (2 Kings xx. 7; v. 7, 8, 10; John ix. 7;) but in anywise take
heed that thou, nor none for thee, send to sorcerers, wizards,
charmers, or enchanters for help: for this were to leave the God of
Israel, and to go to Beelzebub, the god of Ekron, for help; as did
wicked Ahaziah (2 Kings i. 2, 3), and to brake thy vow which thou hast
made with the blessed Trinity in thy baptism; and be sure that God will
never give a blessing by those means which he hath accursed (Lev. xx.
6; Deut. xviii. 10, &c.;) but if he permit Satan to cure thy body, fear
lest it tend to the damnation of thy soul: thou art tried, beware!
(Deut. xiii. 3.)

When thou hast sent for the physician, take heed that thou put not thy
trust rather in the physician than in the Lord, as Asa. did; of whom it
is said, that he sought not to the Lord in his disease, but to the
physician (2 Chron. xvi. 12;) which is a kind of idolatry that will
increase the Lord's anger, and make the physic received ineffectual.
Use, therefore, the physician as God's instrument, and physic as God's
means. And seeing it is not lawful without prayer to use ordinary food
(1 Tim. iv. 4), much less extraordinary physic, whose good effect
depends upon the blessing of God, before thou takest thy physic pray,
therefore, heartily unto God to bless it to thy use (Jer. viii. 22), in
these or the like words:--

[105] Here name that sin which most troubleth thy conscience.
