<p>
  <a class="prev" href="28.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="30.html">Next</a>
</p>

## A Prayer before taking of Medicine.

O Merciful Father, who art the Lord of health and of sickness, of life
and of death; who killest and makest alive; who bringest down to the
grave and raisest up again; I come unto thee, as to the only physician,
who canst cure my soul from sin, and my body from sickness. I desire
neither life nor death, but refer myself to thy most holy will; for,
though we must needs die, and being dead, our lives are as water spilt
on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again, yet hath thy gracious
providence (whilst life remaineth) appointed means which thou wilt have
thy children to use; and (by the lawful use thereof) to expect thy
blessing upon thy own means, to the curing of their sickness, and
restitution of their health. And now, O Lord, in this my necessity, I
have, according to thy ordinance, sent for thy servant the physician,
who hath prepared for me this medicine, which I receive as means sent
from thy fatherly hand; I beseech thee, therefore, that as by thy
blessing on a lump of dry figs, thou didst heal Hezekiah's sore, that
he recovered; and by seven times washing in the river of Jordan, didst
cleanse Naaman the Syrian of his leprosy; and didst restore tire man
that was blind from his birth, by anointing his eyes with clay and
spittle, and sending him to wash in the pool of Siloam; and by touching
the hand of Peter's wife's mother, didst cure her of her fever; and
didst restore the woman that touched the hem of thy garment: so it
would please thee of thy infinite goodness and mercy, to sanctify this
medicine to my use, and to give such a blessing unto it, that it may
(if it be thy will and pleasure) remove this my sickness and pain, and
restore me to health and strength again. But if the number of those
days which thou hast appointed for me to live in this vale of misery be
at an end, and that thou hast sent this sickness as thy messenger to
call me out of this mortal life, then, Lord, let thy blessed will be
done; for I submit my will to thy most holy pleasure. Only, I beseech
thee, increase my faith and patience, and let thy grace and mercy be
never wanting unto me; but in the midst of all extremities, assist me
with thy Holy Spirit, that I may willingly and cheerfully resign up my
soul, the price of thy own blood, into thy most gracious hands and
custody. Grant this, O Father, for Jesus Christ's sake; to whom, with
thee, and the Holy Ghost, be all honour and glory, both now and
evermore. Amen.

<p>
  <a class="prev" href="28.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="30.html">Next</a>
</p>
