## Meditations for the Sick.

Whilst thy sickness remains, use often, for thy comfort, these few
meditations, taken from the ends wherefore God sendeth afflictions to
his children. Those are ten.

1. That by afflictions God may not only correct our sins past, but also
work in us a deeper loathing of our natural corruptions, and so prevent
us from falling into many other sins, which otherwise we would commit;
like a good father, who suffers his tender babe to scorch his finger in
a candle, that he may the rather learn to beware of falling into a
greater fire: so that the child of God may say with David, "It is good
for me that I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy statutes; for
before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I keep thy word." And
indeed, saith St. Paul (1 Cor. xi. 32), "We are chastened of the Lord,
because we should not be condemned with the world." With one cross God
maketh two cures--the chastisement of sins past, and the prevention of
sin to come. For though the eternal punishment of sin, as it proceeds
from justice, is fully pardoned in the sacrifice of Christ, yet we are
not, without serious judging ourselves, exempted from the temporal
chastisement of sin; for this proceeds only from the love of God, for
our good. And this is the reason, that when Nathan told David, from the
Lord, that his sins were forgiven, yet that the sword of chastisement
should not depart from his house, and that his child should surely die.
For God, like a skilful physician, seeing the soul to be poisoned with
the settling of sin, and knowing that the reigning of the flesh will
prove the ruin of the Spirit, ministereth the bitter pill of
affliction, whereby the relics of sin are purged, and the soul more
soundly cured; the flesh is subdued, and the spirit is sanctified. O
the odiousness of sin, which causeth God to chasten so severely his
children, whom otherwise he loveth so dearly!

2. God sendeth affliction to seal unto us our adoption, for "every
child whom God loveth, he correcteth; and he is a bastard that is not
corrected." (Heb. xii. 6, 7, 8.) Yea, it is a sure note, that where God
seeth sin and smites not, there he detests and loves not; therefore it
is said, that he suffered the wicked sons of Eli to continue in their
sins, without correction, "because the Lord would slay them." On the
other side, there is no surer token of God's fatherly love and care,
than to be corrected with some cross, as oft as we commit any sinful
crime. Affliction, therefore, is a seal of adoption, no sign of
reprobation; for the purest corn is cleanest fanned, the finest gold is
oftest tried, the sweetest grape is hardest pressed, and the truest
Christian heaviest crossed.

3. God sends affliction to wean our hearts from too much loving this
world and worldly vanities; and to cause us the more earnestly to
desire and long for eternal life. As the children of Israel, had they
not been ill-entreated in Egypt, would never have been so willing to go
towards Canaan; so, were it not for the crosses and afflictions of this
life, God's children would not so heartily long for and willingly
desire the kingdom of heaven. For we see many epicures that would be
content to forego heaven, on condition that they might still enjoy
their earthly pleasures; and, having never tasted the joys of a better,
how loath are they to depart this life? whereas the Apostle that saw
heaven's glory tells us, that there is no more comparison between the
joys of eternal life, and the pleasures of this world, than there is
between the filthiest dung and the pleasantest meat; or between the
most noisome dung-hill and the fairest bed-chamber (2 Cor. xii. 4;
Phil. iii. 8.) As therefore a loving nurse puts wormwood or mustard on
the breast, to make the child the rather to forsake it; so God mixes
sometimes affliction with the pleasures and prosperity of this life,
lest, like the children of this generation, they should forget God, and
fall into too much love of this present evil world; and so by riches
grow proud; by fame, insolent; by liberty, wanton; and spurn with their
heel against the Lord, when they wax fat (Deut. xxxii. 15.) For if
God's children love the world so well, when, like a curst step-mother,
she misuses and strikes us, how should we love this harlot, if she
smiled upon us, and stroked us, as she does her own worldly brats? Thus
doth God, like a wise and a loving father, embitter with crosses the
pleasures of this life to his children, that, finding in this earthly
state no true and permanent joys, they might sigh and long for eternal
life, where firm and everlasting joys are only to be found.

4. By affliction and sickness God exercises his children, and the
graces which he bestows upon them. He refines and tries their faith, as
the goldsmith doth his gold in the furnace, to make it shine more
glistering and bright (1 Pet. i. 7;) he stirreth us up to pray more
diligently, and zealously, and proveth what patience we have learned
all this while in his school. [106] The like experience he makes of our
hope, love, and all the rest of our Christian virtues; which, without
this trial, would rust, like iron unexercised, or corrupt like standing
waters, that either have no current, or else are not poured from vessel
to vessel; whose taste remaineth, and whose scent is not changed (Jer.
xlviii. 11.) And rather than a man should keep still the scent of his
corrupt nature to damnation, who would not wish to be changed from
state to state, by crosses and sickness, to salvation? For as the
camomile which is trodden groweth best, and smelleth most fragrant; and
as the fish is sweetest that lives in the saltest waters: so those
souls are most precious to Christ who are most exercised and afflicted
with crosses.

5. God sends afflictions, to demonstrate to the world the trueness of
his children's love and service. Every hypocrite will serve God whilst
he prospereth and blesseth him, as the devil falsely accused Job to
have done: but who (save his loving child) will love and serve him in
adversity, when God seemeth to be angry and displeased with him? yea,
and cleave unto him most inseparably, when he seemeth with the greatest
frown and disgrace to reject a man, and to cast him out of his favour;
yea, when he seemeth to wound and kill as an enemy: yet, then to say
with Job, "Though thou, Lord, kill me, yet will I put my trust in
thee." The loving and the serving of God, and trusting in his mercy in
the time of our correction and misery, is the truest note of an
unfeigned child and servant of the Lord.

6. Sanctified affliction is a singular help to further our true
conversion, and to drive us home by repentance to our heavenly Father.
"In their affliction," saith the Lord, "they will seek me diligently."
(Hos. v. 15.) Egypt's burdens made Israel cry unto God (Exod. iii. 7.)
David's troubles made him pray (Psal. lxxxvi. 7.) Hezekiah's sickness
made him weep (Isa. xxxviii. 2, 3;) and misery drove the prodigal child
to return and sue for his father's grace and mercy. Yea, we read of
many in the gospel, that by sicknesses and afflictions were driven to
come unto Christ, who, if they had had health and prosperity as others,
would have like others neglected or contemned their Saviour, and never
have sought unto him for his saving health and grace. For as the ark of
Noah, the higher it was tossed with the flood, the nearer it mounted
towards heaven, so the sanctified soul, the more it is exercised with
affliction, the nearer it is lifted towards God. O blessed is that
cross that draweth a sinner to come upon the knees of his heart unto
Christ, to confess his own misery, and to implore his endless mercy! O
blessed, ever blessed be that Christ, that never refuseth the sinner
that cometh unto him, though weather-driven by affliction and misery!

7. Affliction worketh in us pity and compassion toward our
fellow-brethren that be in distress and misery; whereby we learn to
have a fellow-feeling of their calamities, and to condole their estate,
as if we suffered with them (Heb. xiii. 3.) And for this cause Christ
himself would suffer, and be tempted in all things like unto us (sin
only excepted) that he might be a merciful High Priest, touched with
the feeling of our infirmities (Heb. iv. 15; ii. 18; v. 8, 9.) For none
can so heartily bemoan the misery of another, as he who first himself
suffered the same affliction. Hereupon a sinner in misery may boldly
say to Christ.

  Non ignare mali, miseris succurrito Christe.

  Our frailty sith, O Christ, thou didst perceive,

  Condole our state, who still in frailty cleave.

8. God uses our sicknesses and afflictions as means and examples both
to manifest to others the faith and virtues which he hath bestowed upon
us, as also to strengthen those who have not received so great a
measure of faith as we; for there can be no greater encouragement to a
weak Christian, than to behold a true professor in the extremest
sickness of his body, supported with greater patience and consolation
in his soul. And the comfortable and blessed departure of such a man
will arm him against the fear of death, and assure him that the hope of
the godly is a far more precious thing than that flesh and blood can
understand, or mortal eyes behold, in this vale of misery. And were it
not that we did see many of those whom we know to be the undoubted
children of God, to have endured such afflictions and calamities before
us, the greatness of the miseries and crosses which oft-times we
endure, would make us doubt whether we be the children of God or no.
And to this purpose St. James saith, "God made Job and the prophets an
example of suffering adversity, and of long patience."

9. By afflictions God makes us conformable to the image of Christ his
Son (Rom. viii. 18; 1 Pet. iv. 14), who being the captain of our
salvation, was made perfect through sufferings (Heb. ii. 10.) And
therefore he first bare the cross in shame, before he was crowned with
glory (Heb. ii. 7;) did first take gall (Matt. xxvii. 34), before he
did eat the honey-comb (Luke xxiv. 42;) and was derided King of the
Jews, by the soldiers in the High Priest's hall, before he was saluted
King of glory, by the angels in his Father's court (Psal. xxiv. 7.) And
the more lively our heavenly Father shall perceive the image of his
natural Son to appear in us, the better he will love us; and when we
have for a time borne his likeness in his sufferings, and fought (2
Tim. iv. 7, 8) and overcome (Rev. iii. 21), we shall be crowned by
Christ; and with Christ, sit on his throne; and of Christ receive the
precious white stone and morning-star (Rev. ii. 17), that shall make us
shine like Christ for ever in his glory (Phil. iii. 21.)

10. Lastly, that the godly may be humbled in respect of their own state
and misery, and God glorified by delivering them out of their troubles
and afflictions, when they call upon him for his help and succour. For
though there be no man so pure, but if the Lord will straitly mark
iniquities he shall find in him just cause to punish him for his sin;
yet the Lord in mercy doth not always, in the affliction of his
children, respect their sins, but sometimes lays afflictions and
crosses upon them for his glory's sake. Thus our Saviour Christ told
his disciples, that the man was not born blind for his own or his
parents' sin, but that the work of God should be shewed on him. So he
told them likewise that Lazarus's sickness was not unto the death, but
for the glory of God. O the unspeakable goodness of God, which turneth
those afflictions, which are the shame and punishment due to our sins,
to be the subject of his honour and glory!

These are the blessed and profitable ends [107] for which God sends
sickness and affliction upon his children; whereby it may plainly
appear that afflictions are not signs either of God's hatred or our
reprobation; but rather tokens and pledges of his fatherly love unto
children whom he loveth, and therefore chasteneth them in this life,
where, upon repentance, there remains hope of pardon; rather than to
refer the punishment to that life where there is no hope of pardon, nor
end of punishment. For this cause, the Christians in the primitive
church [108] were wont to give God great thanks for afflicting them in
this life. So the apostles rejoiced, that they were counted worthy to
suffer for Christ's name (Acts v. 41.) And the Christian Hebrews
suffered with joy the spoiling of their goods, knowing that they had in
heaven a better, and an enduring substance (Heb. x. 34.) And in respect
of those holy ends, the apostle saith, "that though no affliction for
the present seemeth joyous, but grievous; yet afterwards it bringeth
the quiet fruit of righteousness to them who are exercised thereby."
(Heb. xii. 11.) Pray, therefore, heartily, that as God hath sent thee
this sickness, so it would please him to come himself unto thee with
thy sickness, by teaching thee to make those sanctified uses of it, for
which he hath inflicted the same upon thee.
