## Meditations for one that is recovered from Sickness.

If God has of his mercy heard thy prayers, and restored thee to thy
health again, consider with thyself:--

1. That thou hast now received from God, as it were, another life.
Spend it therefore to the honour of God, in newness of life. Let thy
sin die with thy sickness; but live thou by grace to holiness.

2. Be not the more secure, that thou art restored to health, neither
exult in thyself, that thou escaped death; but think rather, that God
seeing how unprepared thou wast, .hath of his mercy heard-thy prayer,
spared thee, and given thee some little longer time of respite; that
thou mayest both amend thy life, and put thyself in a better readiness
against the time that he shall call for thee, without further delay,
out of this world. For though thou hast escaped this, it may be, thou
shalt not escape the next sickness.

3. Consider how fearful a reckoning thou hadst made before the
judgment-seat of Christ, by this time, if thou hadst died of this
sickness: spend, therefore, the time that remains, so as that thou
mayest be able to make a more cheerful account of thyself, when it must
be expired indeed.

4. Put not far off the day of death; thou knowest not, for all this,
how near it is at hand; and being so fairly warned, be wiser. For if
thou be taken unprovided the next time, thy excuse will be less, and
thy judgment greater.

5. Remember that thou hast vowed amendment and newness of life. Thou
hast "vowed a vow unto God, defer not to pay it, for he delighteth not
in fools; pay, therefore, that thou hast vowed." (Eccles. v. 4.) The
unclean spirit is cast out; O let him not re-enter with seven worse
than himself! Thou hast sighed out the groans of contrition; thou hast
wept the tears of repentance; thou art washed in the pool of Bethesda,
streaming with five bloody wounds, not of a troubling angel (John v.
4), but of the angel of God's presence (Isa. lxiii. 9), troubled with
the wrath due to thy sins; who descended into hell, to restore thee to
saving health, and heaven. Return not now, with the dog, to thine own
vomit, nor, like the washed sow, to wallow again in the mire of thy
former sins and uncleanness; lest being entangled and overcome again
with the filthiness of sin, which now thou hast escaped, thy latter end
prove worse than the first beginning. Twice, therefore, doth our
Saviour Christ give the same cautionary warning to healed sinners.
First, to the man cured of his thirty-eight years' disease--"Behold,
thou art made whole; sin no more, lest a worse thing fall upon thee."
Secondly, to the woman taken in adultery--"Neither do I condemn thee;
go thy way and sin no more." Teaching us, how dangerous a thing it is
to relapse and fall again into the former excess of riot (1 Pet. iv.
4.) Take heed, therefore, unto thy ways, and pray for grace, that thou
mayest apply thy heart unto wisdom, during that small number of days
which yet remain behind; and for thy present mercy and health received,
imitate the thankful leper, and return to God this or the like
thanksgiving:--

## A Thanksgiving to be said of one that is recovered from Sickness.

O gracious and merciful father, who art the Lord of health and
sickness, of life and of death; who killest and makest alive; who
bringest down to the grave and raiseth up again; who art the only
preserver of all those that trust in thee, I, thy poor and unworthy
servant, having now, by experience of my painful sickness, felt the
grievousness of misery due unto sin, and the greatness of thy mercy in
forgiving sinners, and perceiving with what a fatherly compassion thou
hast heard my prayers and restored me to my health and strength again,
do here, upon the bended knees of my heart, return, with the thankful
leper, to acknowledge thee alone to be the God of my health and
salvation; and to give thee praise and glory for my strength and
deliverance out of that grievous disease and malady; and for thus
turning my mourning into mirth, my sickness into health, and my death
into life. My sins deserved punishment, and thou hast corrected me, but
hast not given me over unto death. I looked from the day to the night
when thou wouldst make an end of me. I did chatter like a crane or a
swallow; I mourned as a dove when the bitterness of sickness oppressed
me; I lifted up mine eyes unto thee,

O Lord, and thou didst comfort me, for thou didst cast all my sins
behind thy back, and didst deliver my soul from the pit of corruption;
and when I found no help in myself nor in any other creature, saying, I
am deprived of the residue of my years, I shall see man no more among
the inhabitants of the world, then didst thou restore me to health
again, and gavest life unto me; I found thee, O Lord, ready to save me.

And now, Lord, I confess that I can never yield unto thee such a
measure of thanks as thou hast for this benefit deserved at my hands.
And seeing that I can never be able to repay thy goodness with
acceptable works, O that I could with Mary Magdalene testify the love
and thankfulness of my heart with abounding tears! O what shall I be
able to render unto thee, O Lord, for all these benefits which thou
hast bestowed upon my soul! Surely, as in my sickness, when I had
nothing else to give thee, I offered Christ and his merits unto thee as
a ransom for my sins; so being now restored by thy grace to my health
and strength, and having no better thing to give, behold, O Lord, I do
here offer up myself unto thee (Rom. xii. 1), beseeching thee so to
assist me with thy Holy Spirit, that the remainder of my life may be
wholly spent in setting forth thy praise and glory.

O Lord, forgive me my former follies and unthankfulness, that I was no
more careful to love thee according to thy goodness, nor to serve thee
according to thy will, nor to obey thee according to thy benefits. And
seeing thou knowest that of myself I am not sufficient so much as to
think a good thought, much less to do that which is good and acceptable
in thy sight, assist me with thy grace and Holy Spirit, that I may, in
my prosperity as devoutly spend my health in thy service, as I was
earnest in my sickness to beg it at thy hands. And suffer me never to
forget either this thy mercy in restoring me to my health, or those
vows and promises which I have made unto thee in- my sickness. With my
new health renew in me, O Lord, a right spirit, which may free me from
the slavery of sin, and establish my heart in the service of grace.
Work in me a great detestation of all sins which were the causes of thy
anger and my sickness; and increase my faith in Jesus Christ, who is
the author of my health and salvation. Let thy good Spirit lead me in
the way that I should walk; and teach me to deny all ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this
world, that others, by my example, may think better of thy truth. And
sith this time which I have yet to live is but a little respite and
small remnant of days which cannot long continue, teach me, O my God,
so to number my days that I may apply my heart to that spiritual wisdom
which directeth to salvation. And to this end make me more zealous than
I have been in religion, more devout in prayer, more fervent in spirit,
more careful to hear and profit by the preaching of thy gospel, more
helpful to my poor brethren, more watchful over my ways, more faithful
in my calling, and every way more abundant in all good works. Let me,
in the joyful time of prosperity, fear the evil day of affliction; in
the time of health, think on sickness; in the time of sickness, make
myself ready for death; and when death approacheth, prepare myself for
judgment. Let my whole life be an expression of thankfulness unto thee
for thy grace and mercy. And therefore, O Lord, I do here from the very
bottom of my heart, together with the thousand thousands of angels, the
four beasts, and twenty-four elders, and all the creatures in heaven
and on the earth, acknowledge to be due unto thee, O Father, which
sittest upon the throne, and to the Lamb, thy Son, who sitteth at thy
right hand, and to the Holy Spirit which proceedeth from both, the holy
Trinity of persons in Unity of substance, all praise, honour, glory,
and power, from this time forth and for evermore. Amen.

[106] Schola crucis, schola lucis. Gubernator in tempestate
dignoscitur, in acie miles probatur; delicata jactatio est, cum
periculum non est: conflictatio in adversis, probatio est
veritatis.--Cypr. Serm. iv. de Im.

[107] Malum pati malum non est; malum facere malum est.--Chrys. de
prod. Jul.

[108] Cum vexamur ac premimur, turn maximas gratias agimus
indulgentissimo patri, quod corruptelam nostram non patitur longius
procedere, sed plagis ac verberibus emendat. --Lact. lib. v. cap. 23.
