<p>
  <a class="prev" href="32.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="34.html">Next</a>
</p>

## A Prayer for a sick Man, when he is told that he is not a man for this world, but must prepare himself to go unto God.

O heavenly Father, who art the Lord God of the spirits of all flesh,
and hast made us these souls, and hast appointed us the time, as to
come into this world, so having finished our course, to go out of the
same, the number of my days, which thou hast determined are now
expired, and I am come to the outmost bounds which thou hast appointed,
beyond which I cannot pass. I know, O Lord, that if thou enterest into
judgment, no flesh can be justified in thy sight; and I, O Lord, of all
others should appear most impure and unjust; for I have not fought that
good fight for the defence of thy faith and religion, with that zeal
and constancy that I should; but for fear of displeasing the world, I
have given way unto sins and errors; and for desire to please my flesh,
I have broken all thy commandments, in thought, word, and deed; so that
my sins have taken such hold on me, that I am not able to look up, and
they are more in number than the hairs on my head. If thou wilt
straitly mark my iniquities, O Lord, where shall I stand? If thou
weighest me in the balance, I shall be found too light. For I am void
of all righteousness that might merit thy mercy, and loaden with all
iniquities that most justly deserve thy heaviest wrath. But, O my Lord,
and my God, for Jesus Christ thy Son's sake, in whom only thou art well
pleased with all penitent and believing sinners, take pity and
compassion upon me, who am the chief of sinners. Blot out all my sins
out of thy remembrance, and wash away all my transgressions out of thy
sight, with the precious blood of thy Son, which I believe that he, as
an undefined Lamb, hath shed for the cleansing of my sins. In this
faith I lived; in this faith I die; believing that Jesus Christ died
for my sins, and rose again for my justification. And seeing that he
hath endured that death, and borne the burden of that judgment which
was due unto my sins; O Father, for his death and passion's sake, now
that I am coming to appear before thy judgment seat, acquit and deliver
me from that fearful judgment which my sins have justly deserved. And
perform unto me that gracious and comfortable promise which thou hast
made in thy gospel, that whosoever believeth in thee hath everlasting
life, and shall not come into judgment, but shall pass from death unto
life. Strengthen, O Christ, my faith; that I may put the whole
confidence of my salvation in the merits of thy obedience and blood.
Increase, O Holy Spirit, my patience; lay no more upon, me than I am
able to bear; and enable me to bear so much as shall stand with thy
blessed will and pleasure. O blessed Trinity in unity, my Creator,
Redeemer, and Sanctifier, vouchsafe, that as my outward man decays, so
my inward man may more and more, by thy grace and consolation, increase
and gather strength. O Saviour, put my soul in a readiness, that like a
wise virgin, having the wedding-garment of thy righteousness and
holiness, she may be ready to meet thee at thy coming with oil in her
lamp. Marry her unto thyself, that she may be one with thee in
everlasting love and fellowship. O Lord, reprove Satan, and chase him
away; deliver my soul from the power of the dog. Save me from the
lion's mouth. I thank thee, O Lord, for all thy blessings, both
spiritual and temporal, bestowed upon me; especially for my redemption
by the death of my Saviour Christ. I thank thee that thou hast
protected me with thy holy angels from my youth up until now. O Lord, I
beseech thee, give them a charge to attend upon me, till thou callest
for my soul; and then to carry her, as they did the soul of Lazarus,
into thy heavenly kingdom. And as the time of my departure shall
approach nearer unto me, so grant, O Lord, that my soul may draw nearer
unto thee, and that I may joyfully commend my soul into thy hands, as
into the hands of a loving Father, and a merciful Redeemer; and at that
instant, O Lord, graciously receive my spirit. All which that I may do,
assist me, I beseech thee, with thy grace; and let thy Holy Spirit
continue with me unto the end, and in the end, for Jesus Christ's sake,
thy Son, my Lord and holy Saviour, in whose name I give thee the glory,
and beg these things at thy hand, in that prayer which Christ himself
hath taught me:--Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name,
&c.

<p>
  <a class="prev" href="32.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="34.html">Next</a>
</p>
