<p>
  <a class="prev" href="35.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="37.html">Next</a>
</p>

## A Prayer to be said for the Sick by them who visit him.

O merciful Father, who art the Lord and giver of life, and to whom
belong the issues of death, we, thy children here assembled, do
acknowledge, that in respect of our manifold sins, we are not worthy to
ask any blessing for ourselves at thy hands, much less to become
suitors to thy Majesty in the behalf of others; yet because thou hast
commanded us to pray one for another, especially for the sick, and hast
promised that the prayers of the righteous shall avail much with thee,
in obedience, therefore, to thy commandment, and confidence of thy
gracious promise, we are bold to become humble suitors unto thy divine
Majesty, in the behalf of this our dear brother (or sister) whom thou
hast visited with the chastisement of thine own fatherly hand. We could
gladly wish the restitution of his health, and a longer continuance of
his life, and Christian fellowship amongst us; but forasmuch as it
appeareth, as far as we can discern, that thou hast appointed by this
visitation to call for him out of this mortal life, we submit our wills
to thy blessed will, and humbly entreat for Jesus Christ's sake, and
the merits of his bitter death and passion, which he hath suffered for
him, that thou wouldst pardon and forgive unto him all his sins, as
well that wherein he was conceived and born, as also all the offences
and transgressions which ever since, to this day and hour, he hath
committed in thought, word, and deed, against thy divine Majesty. Cast
them behind thy back; remove them as far from thy presence, as the east
is from the west; blot them out of thy remembrance; lay them not to his
charge; wash them away with the blood of Christ, that they may no more
be seen; and deliver him from all the judgments which are due unto him
for his sins, that they may never trouble his conscience, nor rise in
judgment against his soul; and impute unto him the righteousness of
Jesus Christ, whereby he may appear righteous in thy sight. And in his
extremity at this time, we beseech thee, look down from heaven upon him
with those eyes of grace and compassion, wherewith thou art wont to
look upon thy children in their affliction and misery. Pity thy wounded
servant, like the good Samaritan; for here is a sick soul that needeth
the help of such a heavenly physician. O Lord increase his faith, that
he may believe that Christ died for him, and that his blood cleanseth
him from all his sins; and either assuage his pain, or else increase
his patience, to endure thy blessed will and pleasure. And, good Lord,
lay no more upon him than thou shalt enable him to bear. Heave him up
unto thyself, with those sighs and groans which cannot be expressed.
Make him now to feel what is the hope of his calling, and what is the
exceeding greatness of thy mercy and power towards them that believe in
thee; and in his weakness, O Lord, shew thou thy strength. Defend him
against the suggestions and temptations of Satan, who (as he hath all
his life time) will now in his weakness especially seek to assail him
and to devour him. O save his soul, and reprove Satan, and command thy
holy angels to be about him to aid him, and to chase away all evil and
malignant spirits far from him. Make him more and more to loath this
world, and to desire to be loosed, and to be with Christ. And when that
good hour and time shall come in which thou hast determined to call for
him out of this present life; give him grace peaceably and joyfully to
yield up his soul into thy merciful hands, and do thou receive her into
thy mercy, and let thy blessed angels carry her into thy kingdom. Make
his last hour his best hour, his last words his best words, and his
last thoughts his best thoughts. And when the sight of his eyes is
gone, and his tongue shall fail to do its office, grant, O Lord, that
his soul may, with Stephen, behold Jesus Christ in heaven ready to
receive him, and that thy Spirit within him may make request for him
with sighs which cannot be uttered. Teach us in him to read and see our
own end and mortality, and therefore to be careful to prepare ourselves
for our last end, and put ourselves in a readiness against the time
that thou shalt call for us in the like manner. Thus, Lord, we
recommend this our dear brother (or sister), thy sick servant, unto thy
eternal grace and mercy, in that prayer, which Christ our Saviour hath
taught us:--Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, &c.

Thy grace, O Lord Jesus Christ; thy love, O heavenly Father; thy
comfort and consolation, O holy Spirit, be with us all, and especially
with this thy sick servant, to the end and in the end. Amen.

Let them read often to the sick some special chapters of the holy
Scripture; as--the three first chapters of the book of Job; the 14th
and 19th chapters of Job; the 34th chapter of Deuteronomy; the two last
chapters of Joshua; the 17th chapter of the first of Kings; the 2d,
4th, and 13th chapters of the second of Kings; the 38th, 40th, and 64th
chapters of Isaiah; the history of the passion of Christ; the 8th
chapter to the Romans; the 15th chapter of the first epistle to the
Corinthians; the 4th of the first epistle to the Thessalonians; the 5th
chapter of the second epistle of Paul to the Corinthians; the first and
last chapters of St. James; the 11th and 12th to the Hebrews; the first
epistle of Peter; the three first and the three last chapters of the
Revelations, or some of these.

And so exhorting the sick party to wait upon God by faith and patience
till he send for him, and praying the Lord to send them a joyful
meeting in the kingdom of heaven, and a blessed resurrection at the
last day, they may depart at their pleasure in the peace of God.

<p>
  <a class="prev" href="35.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="37.html">Next</a>
</p>
