<p>
  <a class="prev" href="36.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="38.html">Next</a>
</p>

## Consolations Against Impatience in Sickness.

If in thy sickness by extremity of pain thou be driven to impatience,
meditate--

1. That thy sins have deserved the pains of hell; therefore thou mayest
with greater patience endure these fatherly corrections.

2. That these are the scourges of thy heavenly Father, and the rod is
in his hand. If thou didst suffer with reverence, being a child, the
corrections of thy earthly parents, how much rather shouldst thou now
subject thyself, being the child of God, to the chastisement of thy
heavenly Father, seeing it is for thy eternal good?

3. That Christ suffered in his soul and body far more grievous pains
for thee, therefore thou must more willingly suffer his blessed
pleasure for thy own good (Isa. liii. 3.) Therefore, saith Peter,
"Christ suffered for you, leaving you an example that ye should follow
his steps" (1 Pet. ii. 21.) And "Let us," saith St. Paul, "run with joy
the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the author and
finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured
the cross," &c. (Heb. xii. 1, 2.)

4. That these afflictions which now you suffer are none other but such
as "are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world," as
witnesseth Peter (1 Peter v. 9;) yea, Job's afflictions were far more
grievous. There is not one of the saints which now are at rest in
heavenly joys, but endured as much as you do before they went thither;
yea, many of them willingly suffered all the torments that tyrants
could inflict upon them, that they might come unto those heavenly joys
to which you are now called. And you have a promise, that "the God of
all grace, after that you have suffered a while, will make you perfect,
stablish, strengthen, and settle you" (1 Pet. v. 10.) And that "God of
his fidelity will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able;
but will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be
able to bear it" (1 Cor. x. 13.)

5. That God hath determined the time when thy affliction shall end, as
well as the time when it began. Thirty-eight years were appointed the
sick man at the pool of Bethesda (John v. 5.) Twelve years to the woman
with the bloody issue (Matt. ix. 20.) Three months to Moses (Exod. ii.
2.) Ten days' tribulation to the angel of the Church at Smyrna (Rev.
ii. 10.) Three days plague to David (2 Sam. xxiv. 13.) Yea, the number
of the godly man's tears are registered in God's book, and the quantity
kept in his bottle (Psal. lvi. 8.)

The time of our trouble, saith Christ, is but a modicum (John xvi. 16.)
God's anger lasts but a moment, saith David (Psal. xxx.) A little
season, saith the Lord (Rev. vi. 11;) and therefore calls all the time
of our pain but the hour of sorrow (John xvi. 21.) David, for the
swiftness of it, compares our present trouble to a brook (Psal. cx. 7),
and Athanasius to a shower. [127] Compare the longest misery that man
endures in this life to the eternity of heavenly joys, and they will
appear to be nothing. And as the sight of a son safely born makes the
mother forget all her former deadly pain (John xvi. 21), so the sight
of Christ in heaven, who was born for thee, will make all these pangs
of death to be quite forgotten, as if they had never been. Like
Stephen, who, as soon as he saw Christ, forgat his own wounds, with the
horror of the grave, and terror of the stones, and sweetly yielded his
soul into the hands of his Saviour (Acts vii.) Forget thy own pain,
think of Christ's wounds. Be faithful unto the death, and he will give
thee the crown of eternal life (Rev. ii. 10.)

6. That you are now called to repetitions in Christ's school, to see
how much faith, patience, and godliness, you have learned all this
while; and whether you can, like Job, receive at the hand of God some
evil, as well as you have hitherto received a great deal of good (Job
ii. 10.) As therefore you have always prayed, "Thy will be done," so be
not now offended at this which is done by his holy will.

7. That "all things shall work together for the best to them that love
God;" insomuch that "neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, &c., shall be able to separate us from the
love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord." [128] (Rom. viii. 28,
38, 39.) Assure yourself that every pang is a prevention of the pains
of hell, every respite an earnest of heaven's rest; and how many
stripes do you esteem heaven worth? As your life hath been a comfort to
others, so give your friends a Christian example to die, and deceive
the devil as Job did. It is but the cross of Christ sent before to
crucify the love of the world in thee, that thou mayest go eternally to
live with Christ who was crucified for thee. As thou art therefore a
true Christian, take up, like Simeon of Cyrene, with both thy arms, his
holy cross, carry it after him unto him; thy pains will shortly pass,
thy joys shall never pass away.

[127] Nubecula est, cito transibit.

[128] Morbus non malis adnumerandus, quia multis utiliter
accidit.--Basil in Hexam. Morbus est utilis quædam institutio, quæ
docet, caduca spernere, et coelestia spirare.--Nazian. ad Philagrium.

<p>
  <a class="prev" href="36.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="38.html">Next</a>
</p>
