<p>
  <a class="prev" href="37.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="39.html">Next</a>
</p>

## Consolations Against the Fear of Death.

If in the time of thy sickness thou findest thyself fearful to die,
meditate--

1. That it argueth a dastardly mind to fear that which is not; for in
the church of Christ there is no death (Isa. xxv. 7, 8), and whosoever
liveth and believeth in Christ, shall never die (John xi. 26). Let them
fear death who live without Christ. Christians die not; but when they
please God, they are like Enoch translated unto God (Gen. v. 24;) their
pains are but Elijah's fiery chariot to carry them up to heaven (2
Kings ii. 11, 12;) or like the sores of Lazarus sending them to
Abraham's bosom (Luke xvi. 23.) In a word, if thou be one of them that,
like Lazarus, lovest Jesus, thy sickness is not unto the death, but for
the glory of God (John xi. 4), who of his love changeth thy living
death to an everlasting life. And if many heathen men, as Socrates,
Curtius, Seneca, &c., died willingly, when they might have lived, in
hope of the immortality of the soul, wilt thou, being trained so long
in Christ's school, and now called to the marriage-supper of the
blessed Lamb (Rev. xix. 7), be one of those guests that refuse to go to
that joyful banquet? God forbid.

2. Remember that thy abode here is but the second degree of thy life;
for after thou hadst first lived nine months in thy mother's womb, thou
wast of necessity driven thence to live here in a second degree of
life. And when that number of months which God hath determined for this
life is expired (Job xiv. 5), thou must likewise leave this and pass to
a third degree in the other world, which never ends; which, to them
that live and die in the Lord, surpasseth as far this kind of life as
this doth that which one lives in his mother's womb. To this last and
most excellent degree of life, through this door passed Christ himself,
and all his saints that were before thee; and so shall all the rest
after them and thee. Why shouldst thou fear that which is common to all
God's elect? why should that be uncouth to thee which was so welcome to
all them? Fear not death, for as it is the exodus of a bad, so it is
the genesis of a better world--the end of a temporal, but the beginning
of an eternal life.

3. Consider that there are but three things that can make death so
fearful to thee:--First, The loss thou hast thereby; Secondly, The pain
that Is therein; Thirdly, The terrible effects which follow after. All
these are but false fires and causeless fears.

For the first, If thou leavest here uncertain goods which thieves may
rob, thou shalt find in heaven a true treasure, that can never be taken
away (Matt. vi. 19, 20:) these were but lent thee as a steward upon
accounts, those shall be given thee as thy reward for ever. If thou
leavest a loving wife, thou shalt be married to Christ, which is more
lovely. If thou leavest children and friends, thou shalt there find all
thy religious ancestors and children departed--yea, Christ, and all his
blessed saints and angels; and as many of thy children as are God's
children, shall thither follow after thee. Thou leavest an earthly
possession and a house of clay (2 Cor. v. 1), and thou shalt enjoy an
heavenly inheritance and mansion of glory, which is purchased,
prepared, and reserved for thee (John xiv. 2.) What hast thou lost?
nay, is not death unto thee gain? Go home, go home, and we will follow
after thee.

Secondly, For the pain in death. The fear of death more pains many than
the very pangs of death; for many a Christian dies without any great
pangs or pains. [129] Pitch the anchor of thy hope on the firm ground
of the word of God, who hath promised in thy weakness to perfect his
strength (2 Cor. xii. 9), and not to suffer thee to be tempted above
that thou art able to bear (1 Cor. x. 13;) and Christ will shortly turn
all thy temporal pains to his eternal joys.

Lastly, As for the terrible effects which follow after death, they
belong not unto thee, being a member of Christ; for Christ by his death
hath taken away the sting of death to the faithful, so that now there
is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus (Rom. viii. 1.) And
Christ hath protested, that he that believeth in him hath everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation, but hath passed from death
unto life (John v. 24.) Upon which the Holy Spirit from heaven saith,
"Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord; and that from henceforth
they rest from their labours and their works do follow them." In
respect, therefore, of the faithful, death is swallowed up in victory,
and his sting, which is sin and the punishment of it, is taken away by
Christ (1 Cor. xv. 54.) Hence death is called, in respect of our
bodies, a sleep and rest (1 Thess. iv. 13; Isa. xxvi.; Rev. xiv.;) in
respect of our souls, a going to our heavenly Father, a departing in
peace, [130] a removing from this body to go to the Lord, a dissolution
of soul and body to be with Christ, [131] What shall I say? "Precious
in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints." These pains are
but thy throes and travail to bring forth eternal life. And who would
not pass through hell to go to paradise? much more through death. There
is nothing after death that thou needest fear; not thy sins, because
Christ hath paid thy ransom; not the Judge, for he is thy loving
brother; not the grave, for it is the Lord's bed; not hell, for thy
Redeemer keeps the keys; not the devil, for God's holy angels pitch
their tents about thee, and will not leave thee till they bring thee to
heaven. Thou wast never nearer eternal life; glorify, therefore, Christ
by a blessed death: say cheerfully, Come, Lord Jesus, for thy servant
cometh unto thee. I am willing, Lord help my weakness.

[129] Timor mortis ipsa morte pejor.

[130] Apolusis en eiree (Luke ii. 29.)

[131] (2 Cor. v.; Phil. i. 23.) Analusis. More porta gloriæ.--Greg.
Janua vitæ.--Bernard.

<p>
  <a class="prev" href="37.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="39.html">Next</a>
</p>
