<p>
  <a class="prev" href="39.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="41.html">Next</a>
</p>

## The sick Person ought now to send for some godly and religious Pastor.

In any wise remember, if conveniently it may be, to send for some godly
and religious pastor, not only to pray for thee at thy death--for God
in such a case hath promised to hear the prayers of the righteous
prophets, and elders of the church (Gen. xx. 7; Jer. xviii. 20; xv. 1;
1 Sam. xii. 19, 23; James v. 14, 15, 16)--but also upon thy unfeigned
repentance to declare to thee the absolution of thy sins. For as Christ
hath given him a calling to baptize thee unto repentance for the
remission of thy sins (Mark i. 4; Acts xix. 4), so hath he likewise
given him a calling, and power, and authority, upon repentance, to
absolve thee from thy sins (1 Cor. v. 4; 2 Cor. x. 8.) "I will give
thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt bind
upon earth, shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt loose
on earth, shall be loosed in heaven" (Matt. xvi. 19.) And again,
"Verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye bind in earth, shall be bound in
heaven; and whatsoever ye loose in earth, shall be loosed in heaven"
(Matt. xviii. 18.) And again, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost; whose soever
sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whose soever sins ye
retain, they are retained" (John xx. 22, 23.) This doctrine was as
ancient in the church of God as Job; for Elihu tells him, That when God
strikes a man with malady on his bed, so that his soul draweth near the
grave, and his life to the buriers, if there be any messenger with him,
or an interpreter, one of a thousand, to declare unto man his
righteousness, then will he have mercy upon him, &c. (Job xxxiii. 19,
22, 23, 24.) And answerable hereunto, saith St. James, If the sick have
committed sins, upon his repentance, and the prayers of the elders,
they shall be forgiven him. (Jam. v. 15.) These have power to shut
heaven (Rev. xi. 6), and to deliver the scandalous impenitent sinner to
Satan (1 Cor. v. 5;) for the weapons of their warfare are not carnal,
but mighty through God, to cast down, &c., and to have vengeance in
readiness against all disobedience. They have the key of loosing,
therefore the power of absolving. [132] (2 Cor. x. 4, &c.)

The bishops and pastors of the church do not declare the forgiveness of
sin by any absolute power of their own (1 Cor. v. 4), for so only
Christ their master forgiveth sins, but ministerially, as the servants
of Christ, and stewards (1 Cor. iv. 1, 2; Acts xiii. 38), to whose
fidelity their Lord and Master hath committed his keys, and that is
when they do declare and pronounce, either publicly or privately, by
the word of God, what bindeth, what looseth, and the mercies of God to
penitent sinners, or his judgments to impenitent and obstinate persons;
and so do apply the general promises or threatenings to the penitent or
impenitent. For Christ from heaven doth by them, as by his ministers on
earth, [133] declare whom he remitteth and bindeth, and to whom he will
open the gates of heaven, and against whom he will shut them. And
therefore it is not said, whose sins ye signify to he remitted; but,
whose sins ye remit. They than do remit sins, because Christ by their
ministry remitteth sins, as Christ by his disciples loosed Lazarus
(John xi. 44.) And as no water could wash away Naaman's leprosy but the
waters of Jordan, though other rivers were as clear, because the
promise was annexed unto the water of Jordan, and not to other rivers;
so though another man may pronounce the same words, yet have they not
the like efficacy and power to work on the conscience, as when they are
pronounced from the mouth of Christ's ministers, because the promise is
annexed to the word of God in their mouths, for them hath he chosen,
separated, and set apart for this work, and to them he hath committed
the ministry and word of reconciliation; by their holy calling and
ordination they have received the Holy Ghost, and the ministerial power
of binding and loosing. They are sent forth of the Holy Ghost for this
work, whereunto he hath called them (John xx. 22, 23; Acts i. 24; xiii.
2, 4; Rom. i. 1; 2 Cor. v. 18, 19; 1 Cor. i. 1; Heb. v. 4; Tit. i. 5.)

And Christ gives his ministers power to pronounce the forgiveness of
sins to the penitent in the same words that he teacheth us in the
Lord's prayer to desire God to forgive us our sins; [134] to assure all
penitent sinners, that God by his minister's absolution doth fully,
through the merits of Christ's blood, forgive them all their sins, so
that what Christ decreeth in heaven, in foro judicii, the same he
declares on earth by his reconciling ministers, in foro poenitentiæ; so
that as God hath reconciled the world to himself by Jesus Christ, so
hath he, saith the apostle, given unto us the ministry of this
reconciliation (2 Cor. v. 18.)

He that sent them to baptize, saying, "Go and teach all nations,
baptizing them," &c., sent them also to remit sins, saying, "As my
Father sent me, so send I you; whose soever sins ye remit, they are
remitted unto them," &c. (John xx. 21, 23.) As therefore none can
baptize, though he use the same, water and words, but only the lawful
minister which Christ hath called and authorized to this divine and
ministerial function, so though others may comfort with good words, yet
none can absolve from sin but only those to whom Christ hath committed
the holy ministry and word of reconciliation (2 Cor. ii. 7, 10; Heb. v.
1, 4; 2 Cor. v. 18, 19;) and of their absolution Christ speaketh, "He
that heareth you, heareth me" (Luke x. 16.) In a doubtful title thou
wilt ask the counsel of a skilful lawyer; in peril of sickness thou
wilt know the advice of the learned physician; and is there no danger
in dread of damnation for a sinner to be his own judge?

Judicious Calvin teaches this point of doctrine most plainly, "Et si
omnes mutuo nos debeamus consolari,"&c. [135] "Although," saith he, "we
ought to comfort and confirm one another in the confidence of God's
mercy, yet we see that the ministers are appointed as witnesses and
sureties to ascertain our consciences of the remission of sins;
insomuch as they are said to remit sins, and to loose souls. Let every
faithful man, therefore, remember, that it is his duty, if inwardly he
be vexed and afflicted with the sense of his sins, not to neglect' that
remedy which is offered unto him by the Lord; to wit, that, for the
easing of his conscience, he may make private confession of his sins
unto his pastor; and that he desire his private endeavour for the
application of some comfort unto his soul, whose office it is, both
publicly and privately, to administer evangelical consolation to God's
people."

Beza highly commendeth this practice; and Luther saith, That he had
rather lose a thousand worlds, than suffer private confession to be
thrust out of the church. Our church hath ever most soundly maintained
the truth of this doctrine; but most justly abolished the tyrannous and
antichristian abuse of popish auricular confessions, which they thrust
upon the souls of Christians as an expiatory sacrifice, and a
meritorious satisfaction for sin; racking their consciences to confess,
when they feel no distress, and to enumerate all their sins, which is
impossible: that by this means they might dive into the secrets of all
men, which oft-times hath proved pernicious, not only to private
persons, but also to public estates. But the truth of God's word is,
that no person having received orders in the Church of Rome, can truly
absolve a sinner; for the keys of absolution are two; the one is the
key of authority, and that only Christ hath (Rev. iii. 7; Mark ii. 7;
Luke v. 21;) the other is the key of ministry, and this he gives to his
ministers (Matt. xvi. 19), who are therefore called the ministers of
Christ, the stewards of God's mysteries (1 Cor. iv. 1), the ambassadors
of reconciliation, bishops, pastors, elders, &c. (2 Cor. v. 20.) [136]
But Christ never ordained, in the New Testament, any order of
sacrificing priests; neither is the name of hiereus, which properly
signifieth sacerdos, or sacrificing priest, given to any officer of
Christ, in all the New Testament; neither do we Tead in all the New
Testament of any who confessed himself to a priest, but Judas ( Matt.
xxvii. 4;) neither is there any real priest in the New Testament, but
only Christ (Heb. vii. 24, 27, 28;) neither is there any part of his
priesthood to be now accomplished on earth, but that which he
fulfilleth in heaven by making intercession for us (Heb. viii. 4; vii.
15.) Seeing, therefore, Christ never ordained any order of sacrificing
priests; and that popish priests scorn the name of minister of the
gospel, to whom only Christ committed his keys, it necessarily
followeth, that no popish priests can truly either excommunicate or
absolve any sinner, or have any lawful right to meddle with Christ's
keys. But the antichristian abuse of this divine ordinance should not
abolish the lawful use thereof between Christians and their pastors in
cases of distress of conscience, for which it was chiefly ordained.

And, verily, there is not any means more excellent to humble a proud
heart, nor to raise up an humble spirit, than this spiritual conference
between the pastors and the people committed to their charge. If any
sin, therefore, troubleth thy conscience, confess it to God's minister;
ask his counsel, and if thou dost truly repent, receive his absolution.
And then doubt not in foro conscientiæ but thy sins be as verily
forgiven on earth, as if thou didst hear Christ himself in foro judicii
pronouncing them to be forgiven in heaven, "Qui vos audit, me audit;"
he that heareth you, heareth me (Luke x. 16.) Try this, and tell me
whether thou shalt not find more ease in thy conscience, than can be
expressed in words. Did profane men consider the dignity of this divine
calling, they would the more honour the calling and reverence the
persons.

The sick man having thus eased his conscience, and received a full
assurance of forgiveness, may do well, having a convenient number of
faithful Christians joined with him, to receive the holy sacrament of
the Lord's Supper, to encourage him in his faith, and to discourage the
devil in his assaults. In this respect the council of Nice termed this
sacrament viaticum, the soul's provision for her journey. And albeit
the Lord's Supper be an ecclesiastical action, yet forasmuch as our
Lord, the first institutor, celebrated it in a private house (Matt.
xxvi. 18; Luke xxii. 12), and that St. Paul terms the houses of
Christians, the churches of Christ (Rom. xvi. 5; Philem. i. 2;) and
that Christ himself hath promised to be in the midst of the faithful,
where but two or three are gathered together in his name (Matt. xviii.
20;) I see no reason, but if Christians desire it, when they are not,
through sickness, able to come to the church but that they should
receive, and pastors ought to administer, the sacrament unto them at
home. He sheweth more simplicity than knowledge, who thinks that this
savours of a private mass; for a mass is called private, not because it
is said in a private house, but because, as Bishop Jewel [137] teacheth
out of Aquinas, the priest receiveth the sacrament himself alone,
without distribution made unto others; and then it is private, although
the whole parish be present and look upon him. There is as much
difference between such a communion, and the antichristian idol of a
private mass, as there is between heaven and hell. For at a communion
in a private family, upon such an extraordinary occasion, Christ's
institution is observed. Many faithful brethren meet together, and
tarry one for another; Christ's death is remembered and shewed, and the
minister, together with the faithful and the sick party, do
communicate. Master Calvin saith, "That he doth very willingly admit
administering of the communion to them that are sick, when the case and
opportunity so requireth." And in another place he saith, "That he hath
many weighty reasons to compel him not to deny the Lord's Supper unto
the sick." Yet I would wish all Christians to use, to receive often, in
their health especially, once every month with the whole church; for
then they shall not need so much to assemble their friends upon such an
occasion, nor so much to be troubled themselves for want of the
sacrament. For, as Mr. Perkins saith very well, [138] "The fruit and
efficacy of the sacrament is not to be restrained to the time of
receiving, but it extends itself to the whole time of man's life
afterwards;" the efficacy whereof, did men thoroughly understand, they
should not need to be so often exhorted to receive it.

"Pastores omnes hic exoratos vellem, ut in hujus controversiæ statum
penitius introspiciant; nec fideles ex hac vita migrantes, et panem
vitæ petentes, viatico suo fraudari sinant, ne lugubris ista in iis ad
impleatur lamentatio. Parvuli panem petunt, et non sit qui frangat
eis." (Lam. iv. 4.) [139]

As, therefore, when a wicked liver dieth, he may say to death as Ahab
said to Elijah, "Hast thou found me, O mine enemy?" (1 Kings xxi. 20;)
so, on the other side, when it is told a penitent sinner that death
knocks at the door, and begins to look him in the face, he may say of
death, as David said of Ahimaaz, "Let him come and welcome, for he is a
good man, and cometh with good tidings" (2 Sam. xviii. 27:) [140] he is
the messenger of Christ, and bringeth unto me the joyful news of
eternal life. And as the Red Sea was a gulf to drown the Egyptians to
destruction, but a passage to the Israelites to convey them to Canaan's
possession, so death to the wicked is a sink to hell and condemnation,
but to the godly the gate to everlasting life and salvation. And one
day of a blessed death will make an amends for all the sorrows of a
bitter life. "Summum hominis bonum, bonus ex hac vita exitus."

When, therefore, thou perceivest thy soul departing from thy body, pray
with thy tongue if thou canst, else pray in thy heart and mind these
words, fixing the eyes of thy soul upon Jesus Christ thy Saviour:--

<p>
  <a class="prev" href="39.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="41.html">Next</a>
</p>
