<p>
  <a class="prev" href="40.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="42.html">Next</a>
</p>

## A Prayer at the yielding up of the Ghost.

O Lamb of God, which by thy blood hast taken away the sins of the
world, have mercy upon me a sinner. Lord Jesus receive my spirit. Amen.

When the sick party is departing, let the faithful that are present
kneel down and commend his soul to God in these or the like words:--

O Gracious God and merciful Father, who art our refuge and strength,
and a very present help in trouble, lift up the light of thy favourable
countenance at this instant upon thy servant that now cometh to appear
in thy presence; wash away, good Lord, all his sins by the merits of
Christ Jesus' blood, that they may never be laid to his charge.
Increase his faith, preserve and keep safe his soul from the danger of
the devil and his wicked angels. Comfort him with thy Holy Spirit;
cause him now to feel that thou art his loving Father, and that he is
thy child by adoption and grace. Save, O Christ, the price of thy own
blood, and suffer him not to be lost whom thou hast bought so dearly.
Receive his soul, as thou didst the penitent thief, into thy heavenly
paradise; let thy blessed angels conduct him thither as they carried
the soul of Lazarus; and grant unto him a joyful resurrection at the
last day. O Father, hear us for him, and hear thy own Son, our only
mediator, that sits at thy right hand, for him and us all, even for the
merits of that bitter death and passion which he hath suffered for us:
in confidence whereof, we now recommend his soul into thy fatherly
hands, in that blessed prayer which our Saviour hath taught us in all
times of our troubles to say unto thee:--"Our Father which art in
heaven, hallowed be thy name," &c.

Thus far of the practice of piety in dying in the Lord.

[132] Ministri peccata remittunt non autixousios, sed organikos

[133] To this end saith Basil, in Asc. c. 13--"Christus omnibus
pastoribus et doctoribus ecclesiæ, Hisen parechei exousian, æqualem
tribuit potestatem, cujus signum est quod omnes ex æquo ligant et
solvunt, ut Petrus." Papists dare not deny this. "Quilibet sacerdos
(quantum est ex virtute clavium) habet potestatem indifferenter in
omnes." In Supplement, Thomæ. iv. ver. 6.

[134] An tinon uphets tas humartias (John xx. 23.) Kai aphis hemin tas
hamartias hemon.

[135] Lib. iii. Instit. cap. iv. sect. 12.

[136] Ministerii claves duplex est, una scientia discernendi (1 Cor.
xii. 10; 1 John iv. l.) Alia est potestas ligandi et absolvendi (John
xx. 23.)

[137] Jewel against Hardinge, Art. I. fol. 4.

[138] Perkins his right way of dying well.

[139] Admonitio ad Pastores.

[140] Ut moriare pius, vivere disce pie.

<p>
  <a class="prev" href="40.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="42.html">Next</a>
</p>
