<p>
  <a class="prev" href="41.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="43.html">Next</a>
</p>

## Now follows the Practice of Piety in dying for the Lord.

#### The practice of piety in dying for the Lord is termed Martyrdom.

Martyrdom is the testimony which a Christian bears to the doctrine of
the Gospel by enduring any kind of death; to invite many, and to
confirm all, to embrace the truth thereof. To this kind of death Christ
hath promised a crown: "Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will
give thee the crown of life." Which promise the Church so firmly
believed, that they termed martyrdom itself a crown. And God, to
animate Christians to this excellent prize, would, by a prediction,
that Stephen, the first Christian martyr, should have his name of a
crown (Stephanos)

Of Martyrdom there are three kinds.

1. Sola voluntate, in will only; as John the evangelist, who, being
boiled in a cauldron of oil, came out rather anointed than sod; and
died of old age at Ephesus.

2. Solo opere, in deed only; as the innocents of Bethlehem.

3. Voluntate et opere, both in will and deed; as in the primitive
Church, Stephen, Polycarpus, Ignatius, Laurentius, Romanus,
Antiochianus, and thousands. And in our days, Cranmer, Latimer, Hooper,
Ridley, Farrar, Bradford, Philpot, Sanders, Glover, Taylor, and others
innumerable, whose fiery zeal to God's truth brought them to the flames
of martyrdom to seal Christ's faith. It is not the cruelty of the
death, but the innocency and holiness of the cause that maketh a
martyr. [141] Neither is an erroneous conscience a sufficient warrant
to suffer martyrdom, because science in God's word must direct
conscience in man's heart: for they who killed the apostles in their
erroneous conscience thought they did God good service (John xvi. 2;)
and Paul of zeal breathed out slaughters against the Lord's saints
(Acts ix. 1; Phil. iii. 6.) Now whether the cause of our Seminary
priests and Jesuits be so holy, true, and innocent, as that it may
warrant their conscience to suffer death, and to hazard their eternal
salvation thereon, let Paul's epistle written to the ancient Christian
Romans {but against our new antichristian Romans) be judge. [142] And
it will plainly appear that the doctrine which St. Paul taught to the
ancient church of Rome is ex diametro opposite in twenty-six
fundamental points of true religion to that which the new church of
Rome teacheth and maintaineth; for St. Paul taught the primitive church
of Rome--

1. That our election is of God's free grace, and not ex operibus
prævisis (Rom. ix. 11; xi. 5, 6.)

2. That we are justified before God by faith only, without good works
(Rom. iii. 20, 28; iv. 2, &c.; i. 17.)

3. That the good works of the regenerate are not of their own
condignity meritorious, nor such as can deserve heaven (Rom. viii. 18;
xi. 6; vi. 23.)

4. That those books only are God's oracles and canonical Scripture,
which were committed to the custody and credit of the Jews (Rom. iii.
2; i. 2; xvi. 26;) such were never the Apocrypha.

5. That the holy Scriptures have God's authority (Rom. ix. 17; iii. 4;
xi. 32, compared with Gal. iii. 22.) therefore above the authority of
the church. [143]

6. That all, as well laity as clergy, that will be saved, must
familiarly read or know the holy Scripture (Rom. xv. 4; x. 1, 2, 8;
xvi. 26.)

7. That all images made of the true God are very idols (Rom. i. 23 and
Rom. ii. 22 compared.) [144]

8. That to bow the knee religiously to an image, or to worship any
creature, is mere idolatry (Rom. xi. 4) and a lying service (i. 25.)

9. That we must not pray unto any, but to God only, in whom we believe
(Rom. x. 13, 14; viii. 15, 27), therefore not to saints and angels.

10. That Christ is our only intercessor in heaven (Rom. viii. 34; v. 2;
xvi. 27.)

11. That the only sacrifice of Christians, is nothing but the spiritual
sacrifices of their souls and bodies to serve God in holiness and
righteousness (Rom. xii. 1; xv. 16), therefore no real sacrificing of
Christ in the mass.

12. That the religious worship called dulia, as well as latria,
belongeth to God alone (Rom. i. 9; xii. 11; xvi. 18 compared.)

13. That all Christians are to pray unto God in their own native
language (Rom. xiv. 11.)

14. That we have not of ourselves, in the state of corruption, freewill
unto good (Rom. vii. 18, &c.; ix. 16.)

15. That concupiscence in the regenerate is sin (Rom. vii. 7, 8, 10.)

16. That the sacraments do not confer grace ex opere operato, but sign
and seal that which is conferred already unto us (Rom. iv. 11, 12; ii.
28, 29.)

17. That every true believing Christian may in this life be assured of
his salvation (Rom. viii. 9; xvi. 35, &c.)

18. That no man in this life, since Adam's fall, can perfectly fulfil
the commandments of God (Rom. vii. 10, &c.; iii. 19, &c.; xi. 32.)

19. That to place religion in the difference of meat and days, is
superstition (Rom. xiv. 3, 5, 6; xvii. 23.)

20. That the imputed righteousness of Christ, is that only that makes
us just before God (Rom. iv. 9, 17, 23.)

21. That Christ's flesh was made of the seed of David, by incarnation;
not of a wafer cake by transubstantiation (Rom. i. 3.)

22. That all true Christians are saints, and not those whom the pope
only doth canonize (Rom. i. 7; viii. 27; xv. 31: xvi. 2, 15; xv. 25.)

23. That ipse, Christ, the God of peace, and not ipsa, the woman, would
bruise the serpent's head (Rom. xvi. 20.)

24. That every soul must of conscience be subject, and pay tribute to
the higher powers, that is, the magistrates which bear the sword (Rom.
xiii. 1, 2, &c.;) and therefore the pope and all prelates must be
subject to their emperors, kings, and magistrates, unless they will
bring damnation upon their souls, as traitors, that resist God and his
ordinance (Rom. xiii. 2.)

25. That Paul, not Peter, was ordained by the grace of God, to be the
chief apostle of the Gentiles, and consequently of Rome, the chief city
of the Gentiles (Rom. xv. 15, 16, 19, 20, &c.; xi. 4, 13, 16.) [145]

26. That the church of Rome may err and fall away from the true faith,
as well as the church of Jerusalem, or any other particular church
(Rom. xi. 20, 21, 22.)

And seeing the new upstart church of Rome teaches in all these, and in
innumerable other points, clean contrary to that which the apostle
taught the primitive Romans, let God and this epistle judge between
them and us; whether of us both stands in the true ancient catholic
faith, which the apostle taught the old Romans; and whether we have not
done well to depart from them, so far as they have departed from the
apostle's doctrine? and whether it be not better to return to St.
Paul's truth than still to continue in Rome's error ? And if this be
true, then let Jesuits and seminary priests take heed and fear, lest it
be not faith, but faction; not truth, but treason ; not religion, but
rebellion; beginning at Tiber and ending at Tyburn, which is the cause
of their deaths. And being sent from a troublesome apostatical see,
rather than from a peacable apostolical seat, because they cannot be
suffered to persuade subjects to break their oaths, and to withdraw
their allegiance from their sovereign, to raise rebellion, to move
invasion, to stab and poison queens, to kill and murder kings, to blow
up whole states with gunpowder, they desperately cast away their own
bodies to be hanged and quartered: and (their souls saved, if they
belong to God) I wish such honour to all his saints that send them
(Psal. cxlix. 9.) And I have just cause to fear, that the miracles of
Lipsius's two ladies, Blunstone's boy, Garnet's straw, and the maid's
fiery apron, will not suffice to clear, that these men are not
murderers of themselves, rather than martyrs of Christ. [146]

And with what conscience can any priest count Garnet a martyr, when his
own conscience forced him to confess, that it was for treason, and not
for religion, that he died? But if the priests of such a gunpowder
gospel be martyrs, I marvel who are murderers? If they be saints, who
are Scythians? and who are cannibals, if they be catholics?

But leaving these, if they will be filthy, to their filthiness still,
let us, to whose fidelity the Lord hath committed his true faith, as a
precious deposit (1 Tim. vi. 20), pray unto God, that we may lead a
holy life, answerable to our holy faith, in piety to Christ, and
obedience to our king (Prov. xxiv. 21; 1 Pet. ii. 17;) that if our
Saviour shall ever count us worthy that honour to suffer martyrdom for
his gospel's sake (Acts v. 41), be it by open burning at the stake, as
in Queen Mary's days; or by secret murdering, as in the
Inquisition-house; or by outrageous massacring, as in the Parisian
Matins; or in being blown up with gunpowder, as was intended in the
Parliament-house; we may have grace to pray for the assistance of his
Holy Spirit, so to strengthen our frailty, and to defend his cause, as
that we may seal with our deaths the evangelical truth which we have
professed in our lives: that in the days of our lives we may be blessed
by his word (Luke xii. 8; Rev. xiv. 13;) in the day of death, be
blessed in the Lord; and in the day of judgment be the blessed of his
Father (Matt. xxv. 34.) Even so grant, Lord Jesus. Amen.

[141] 1 Pet. ii. 19. Causa, non passio, facit martyrem.--Aug Ep. 61.
Non mortes sed mores.--Dr. Boys; Tho. Aquin. 1. ii. quæst. 17, arc. 6.

[142] Epistola ad Romanos, is now Epistola in Romanos.

[143] Note, that "the scripture saith," "God saith," and "the scripture
concludeth," is all one with Paul.

[144] To eedola, having reference to what he spake before (Rom i. 23)
Of images.

[145] It seems by Rom. xv. 20, 29, and the whole last chapter, that the
Christians who were in Rome before Paul came thither, were converted by
those preachers whom he had sent thither before him; for he calls them
his "helpers" (ver. 3, 9), "kinsmen" (ver. 7, 13), "fellow-prisoners"
(ver. 7), "the first-fruits of Achaia," where he had preached (ver. 5),
all familiar to him, and to Tertius, who wrote the epistle (ver. 22.)
And therefore they came so joyfully to meet Paul at Apii Forum, hearing
that he was coming towards Rome (Acts xxviii. 15.)

[146] Ut Alexandri causa iis qui illam scire cupiunt patefiat;
judicatus est Ephesi ab Æmilio Frontino proconsule, non propter
professiones nomen, sed propter perpetrata latrocinia, cum jam esset
prævaricator (et proditor.)--Euseb. Hist. Eccles. lib. iv. c. 18.

<p>
  <a class="prev" href="41.html">Previous</a>
  <a class="next" href="43.html">Next</a>
</p>
