## A Divine Colloquy between the Soul and her Saviour upon the effectual
Merits of his dolorous Passion.

Soul. Lord, wherefore didst thou wash thy disciples' feet?

Christ. To teach thee how thou shouldst prepare thyself to come to my
supper.

Soul. Lord, why shouldst thou wash them thyself? (John xiii. 4.)

Christ. To teach thee humility, if thou wilt be my disciple.

Soul. Lord, wherefore didst thou before thy death institute thy last
supper? (Luke xxii. 19, 20.)

Christ. That thou mightst the better remember my death, and be assured
that all the merits thereof are thine.

Soul. Lord, wherefore wouldst thou go to such a place where Judas knew
to find thee? (John xviii. 2.)

Christ. That thou mightst know that I went as willingly to suffer for
thy sin, as ever thou wentest to any place to commit a sin.

Soul. Lord, wherefore wouldst thou begin thy passion in a garden? (John
xviii. 1.)

Christ. Because that in a garden thy sin took first beginning (Gen.
iii. 3.)

Soul. Lord, wherefore did thy three select disciples fall so fast
asleep, when thou didst begin to fall into thy agony? (Matt. xxvi. 40.)

Christ. To shew that I alone wrought the work of thy redemption (Isa.
lxiii. 5.)

Soul. Lord, why were there so many plots and snares laid for thee?
(Matt. xxvi. 4.)

Christ. That I might make thee to escape all snares of thy ghostly
hunter (Psalm 134:7Psal cxxiv. 7.)

Soul. Lord, why shouldst thou suffer Judas, betraying thee, to kiss
thee? (Matt. xxvi. 49.)

Christ. That by enduring the words of dissembling lips, I might there
begin to expiate sin, where Satan first brought it into the world (Gen.
iii. 4, 5.)

Soul. Lord, why wouldst thou be sold for thirty-pieces of silver?
(Matt. xxvii. 3.)

Christ. That I might free thee from perpetual bondage.

Soul. Lord, why didst thou pray with such strong crying and tears?
(Matt. xxvi. 39; Heb. v. 7.)

Christ. That I might quench the fury of God's justice, which was so
fiercely kindled against thee.

Soul. Lord, why wast thou so afraid, and cast into such an agony? (Mark
xiv. 33.)

Christ. That suffering the wrath due to thy sins, thou mightst be more
secure in thy death, and find more comfort in thy crosses.

Soul. Lord, wherefore didst thou pray so oft and so earnestly that the
cup might pass from thee? (Matt. xxvi. 39, 42, 44.)

Christ. That thou mightst perceive the horror of that curse and wrath,
which being due to thy sins, I was then to drink and endure for thee
(Gal. iii. 13.)

Soul. Lord, wherefore didst thou, after thy wish, submit thy will to
the will of thy Father? (Luke xxii. 42.)

Christ. To teach thee what thou shouldst do in all thy afflictions; and
how willingly thou shouldst yield to bear with patience that cross,
which thou seest to come from the just hand of thy heavenly Father.

Soul. Lord, wherefore didst thou sweat such drops of blood? (Luke xxii.
44.)

Christ. That I might cleanse thee from thy stains and bloody spots.

Soul. Lord, why shouldst thou be taken when thou mightst have escaped
thine enemies? (Luke xxii. 54.)

Christ. That thy spiritual enemies should not take thee, and cast thee
into the prison of utter darkness (Matt. v. 25; xxii. 13.)

Soul. Lord, wherefore wouldst thou be forsaken of all thy disciples?
(Matt. xxvi. 56.)

Christ. That I might reconcile thee unto God, of whom thou wast
forsaken for thy sins.

Soul. Lord, wherefore wouldst thou stand to be apprehended alone? (John
xviii. 8.)

Christ. To shew thee that my love of thy salvation was more than the
love of all my disciples.

Soul. Lord, wherefore was the young man caught by the soldiers, and
unstript of his linen, who came out of his bed, hearing the stir at thy
apprehension and leading to the high priest? (Mark xiv. 51, 52.)

Christ. To shew their outrage in apprehending me, and my power in
preserving out of their outrageous hands, all my disciples, who
otherwise had been worse handled by them than was that young man.

Soul. Lord, wherefore wouldst thou be bound? (Matt. xxvii. 2.)

Christ. That I might loose the cords of thine iniquities.

Soul. Lord, why wast thou denied of Peter? (Luke xxii. 57, 58, 60.)

Christ. That I might confess thee before my Father, and thou mightst
learn, that there is no trust in man, and that salvation proceeds of my
mere mercy.

Soul. Lord, wherefore wouldst thou bring Peter to repentance by the
crowing of a cock? (Matt. xxvi. 74, 75.)

Christ. That none should despise the means which God hath appointed for
their conversion, though they seem never so mean.

Soul. Lord, wherefore didst thou at the cock-crowing turn and look upon
Peter? (Luke xxii. 61.)

Christ. Because thou mightst know, that without the help of my grace,
no means can turn a sinner unto God, when he is once fallen from him.

Soul. Lord, wherefore wast thou covered with a purple robe? (John xix.
5.)

Christ. That thou mightst perceive that it was I that did away thy
scarlet sins (Isa. i. 18.)

Soul. Lord, wherefore wouldst thou be crowned with thorns? (Matt.
xxvii. 29.)

Christ. That by wearing thorns, the first fruits of the curse, it might
appear, that it is I which take away the sins and curse of the world,
and crown thee with the crown of life and glory (1 Pet. v. 4; Rev. ii.
10.)

Soul. Lord, why was a reed put into thy hand? (Matt. xxvii. 29.)

Christ. That it might appear that I came not to break the bruised reed
(Matt. xii. 20.)

Soul. Lord, wherefore wast thou mocked of the Jews? (Matt. xxvii. 29.)

Christ. That thou mightst insult over devils, who otherwise would have
mocked thee, as the Philistines did Sampson (Judg. xvi. 25.)

Soul. Lord, wherefore wouldst thou have thy blessed face defiled with
spittle? (Matt. xxvii. 30.)

Christ. That I might cleanse thy face from the shame of sin.

Soul. Wherefore, Lord, were thy eyes hood-winked with a veil? (Mark
xiv. 65.)

Christ. That thy spiritual blindness being removed, thou mightst behold
the face of my Father in heaven.

Soul. Lord, wherefore did they buffet thee with fists, and heat thee
with staves? (Matt. xxvi. 67; Matt. xxvii. 30.)

Christ. That thou mightst be freed from the strokes and tearings of
infernal fiends.

Soul. Lord, wherefore wouldst thou be reviled? (Matt. xxvii. 39.)

Christ. That God might speak peace unto thee by his word and Spirit.

Soul. Lord, wherefore was thy face disfigured with blows and blood?
(John xix. 3; Isa. 1. 6.)

Christ. That thy face might shine glorious as the angels in heaven
(Matt. xiii. 43.)

Soul. Lord, wherefore wouldst thou be so cruelly scourged? (John xix.
1.)

Christ. That thou mightst be freed from the sting of conscience, and
whips of everlasting torments.

Soul. Lord, wherefore wouldst thou be arraigned at Pilate's bar? (Mark
xv. 1.)

Christ. That thou mightst at the last day be acquitted before my
judgment-seat.

Soul. Lord, wherefore wouldst thou be falsely accused? (Luke xxiii. 2.)

Christ, That thou shouldst not be justly condemned.

Soul. Lord, wherefore wouldst thou be turned over to be condemned by a
strange judge? (Matt. xxvii. 2.)

Christ. That thou being redeemed from the captivity of a hellish
tyrant, mightst be restored to God, whose own thou art by right.

Soul. Wherefore, O Christ, didst thou acknowledge that Pilate had power
over thee from above? (John xix. 11.)

Christ. That antichrist, under pretence of being my vicar, should not
exalt himself above all principalities and powers (Tit. iii. 1; Rom.
xiii. 1; 1 Pet. ii. 13, 14.)

Soul. Lord, why wouldst thou suffer thy passion under Pontius Pilate,
being a Roman president to Caesar of Rome? (Luke xxiii. 1, 2; John xix.
13, &c.)

Christ. To shew, that the Cæsarian and Pontifician polity of Rome
should chiefly persecute my church, and crucify me in my members (note
well Rev. xi. 8, and Rev. xvii. 5, 6; John xix. 16.)

Soul. But why, Lord, wouldst thou be condemned? (Luke xxiii. 24; Rom.
viii. 3.)

Christ. That the law being condemned in me, thou mightst not be
condemned by it.

Soul. But why wast thou condemned, seeing nothing could be proved
against thee? (Matt. xxvii. 24; John xix. 6.)

Christ. That thou mightst know, that it was not for my faults, but for
thine that I suffered.

Soul. Lord, wherefore wast thou led to suffer out of the city? (Matt.
xxvii. 33; Heb. xiii. 12.)

Christ. That I might bring thee to rest in the heavenly city.

Soul. Lord, why did the Jews compel Simon of Cyrene, coming out of the
field, to carry thy cross? (Luke xxiii. 26; Matt. xxvii. 32.)

Christ. To shew the weakness whereunto the burden of thy sins brought
me, and what must be every Christian's case which goeth out of the
field of this world toward the heavenly Jerusalem.

Soul. Lord why wast thou stripped of thy garments? (John xix. 23.)

Christ. That thou mightst see how I forsook all to redeem thee.

Soul. Lord, wherefore wouldst thou be lifted upon the cross? (John xii.
32.)

Christ. That I might lift thee up with me to heaven.

Soul. Lord, wherefore didst thou hang upon a cursed tree? (Gal. iii.
13.)

Christ. That I might satisfy for thy sin committed in eating the
forbidden fruit of a tree (Gen. ii. 17.)

Soul. Lord, wherefore wouldst thou hang between two thieves? (Luke
xxiii. 33.)

Christ. That thou mightst have place in the midst of heavenly angels.

Soul. Lord, wherefore were thy hands and feet nailed to the cross?
(Psal. xxii. 16; John xx. 25.)

Christ. To enlarge thy hands to do the works of righteousness, and to
set thy feet at liberty to walk in the ways of peace.

Soul. Lord, wherefore did they crucify thee in Golgotha, the place of
dead mens' sculls? (Matt. xxvii. 33.)

Christ To assure thee that my death is life unto the dead.

Soul. Lord, why did not the soldiers divide thy seamless coat? (John
xix. 24.)

Christ. To shew that my church is one, without rent or schism.

Soul. Lord, wherefore didst thou taste vinegar and gall? (Matt. xxvii.
34.)

Christ. That thou mightst eat the bread of angels, and drink the water
of life.

Soul. Lord, why saidst thou upon the cross, "It is finished?" (John
xix. 30.)

Christ. That thou mightst know that by my death the law was fulfilled,
and thy redemption effected (Rom. x. 4; 2 Cor. iii. 13.)

Soul. Lord, why didst thou cry out upon the cross, "My God, my God, why
hast thou forsaken me?" (Mark xv. 34.)

Christ. Lest thou, being forsaken of God, shouldst have been driven to
cry in the pains of hell, wo and alas! for evermore.

Soul. Lord, wherefore was there such a general darkness when thou didst
suffer and cry out upon the cross? (Matt. xxvii. 45.)

Christ. That thou mightst see an image of those hellish pains which I
suffered to deliver thee from the endless pains of hell, and
everlasting chains of darkness (2 Pet. ii. 4; Jude v. 6.)

Soul. Lord, why wouldst thou have thy arms nailed abroad?

Christ. That I might embrace thee more lovingly in the everlasting arms
of mercy (Mark. x. 16; Col. ii. 14; Deut. xxxiii. 27.)

Soul. Lord, why did the thief, that never wrought good before, obtain
paradise upon so short repentance? (Luke xxiii. 43.)

Christ. That thou mayst see the power of my death to forgive them that
repent, that no sinner needs despair.

Soul. Lord, why did not the other thief which hanged as near thee
obtain the like mercy? (Luke xxiii. 39.)

Christ. Because I leave whom I will, to harden themselves in
themselves, to destruction, that all should fear, and none presume
(Rom. ix. 18.)

Soul. Lord, wherefore didst thou cry with such a loud and strong voice
in yielding up the ghost? (Matt. xxvii. 50.

Christ. That it might appear that no man took my life from me, but that
I laid it down of myself (John x. 18.)

Soul. Lord, wherefore didst thou commend thy soul into thy Father's
hands? (Luke xxiii. 46.)

Christ. To teach thee what thou shouldst do, being to depart this life.

Soul. Lord, wherefore was the veil of the temple rent in twain at thy
death? (Matt. xxvii. 51.)

Christ. To shew that the Levitical law should be no longer a
partition-wall between Jews and Gentiles, and that the way to heaven is
now open to all believers (Eph. ii. 14; Heb. x. 19, 20.)

Soul. Lord, wherefore did the earth quake and the stones cleave at thy
death? (Matt. xxvii. 51.)

Christ. For horror to bear her Lord dying, and to upbraid the cruel
hardness of sinners' hearts.

Soul. Lord, wherefore did not the soldiers break thy legs, as they did
those of the thieves who hanged at thy right and left hand? (Exod. xii.
46; John xix. 33.)

Christ. That thou mightst know that they had not power to do any more
unto me than the scripture had foretold that they should do, and I
should suffer to save thee.

Soul. Lord, wherefore was thy side opened with a spear?

Christ. That thou mightst have a way to come nearer my heart.

Soul. Lord, wherefore ran there out of thy precious side blood and
water?

Christ. To assure thee that I was slain indeed, seeing my heart-blood
gushed out, and the water which compassed ray heart flowed forth after
it, which once spilt, must needs die. [147]

Soul. Lord, wherefore ran the blood first by itself, and the water
afterwards by itself, out of thy blessed wound? (1 John v. 6.)

Christ. To assure thee of two things:--First, That by my blood-shedding
justification and sanctification were effected to save thee. Secondly,
That my Spirit, by the conscionable use of the water in baptism, and
blood in the eucharist, will effect in thee righteousness and holiness,
by which thou shalt glorify me.

Soul. Lord, wherefore did the graves open at thy death? (Matt. xxvii.
52.)

Christ. To signify that death, by my death, had now received his
death's wound, and was overcome.

Soul. Lord, wherefore wouldst thou be buried? (Matt. xxvii. 60.)

Christ. That thy sins might never rise up to judgment against thee.

Soul. Lord, wherefore wouldst thou be buried by two such honourable
senators as Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea? (Matt. xxvii. 57; John
xix. 39, 40.)

Christ. That the truth of my death, the cause of thy life, might more
evidently appear unto all.

Soul. Lord, wherefore wast thou buried in a new sepulchre, wherein was
never man laid? (John xix. 41; Matt. xxvii. 60.)

Christ. That it might appear that I, and not another, arose; and that
by my own power, and not by another's virtue, like him who revived at
the touching of Elisha's bones (2 Kings xiii. 21.)

Soul. Lord, wherefore didst thou raise up thy body again? (Matt.
xxviii. 6.)

Christ. That thou mayst be assured that thy sins are discharged, and
that thou art justified (Rom. iv. 25.)

Soul. Lord, wherefore did so many bodies of thy saints, which slept,
arise at thy resurrection? (Matt. xxvii. 52, 53; Acts xvii. 31.)

Christ. To give thee assurance, that all the saints shall arise, by
virtue of my resurrection, at the last day.

Soul. Lord, what shall I render unto thee for all these benefits?
(Psal. cxvi. 12.)

Christ. Love thy Creator, and become a new creature (Gal. vi. 15.)
