## The Soul's Soliloquy, ravished in contemplation of the Passion of our
Lord.

What hadst thou done, O my sweet Saviour, and ever-blessed Redeemer,
that thou wast thus betrayed of Judas, sold of the Jews, apprehended as
a malefactor, and led bound as a lamb to the slaughter? What evil hadst
thou committed, that thou shouldst be thus openly arraigned, accused
falsely, and unjustly condemned before Annas and Caiaphas, the Jewish
priests, at the judgment-seat of Pilate, the Roman president? What was
thine offence? or to whom didst thou ever wrong? that thou shouldst be
thus pitifully scourged with whips, crowned with thorns, scoffed with
flouts, reviled with words, buffeted with fists, and beaten with
staves? O Lord, what didst thou deserve to have thy blessed face spit
upon, and covered as it were with shame? to have thy garments parted,
thy hands and feet nailed to the cross? to be lifted upon the cursed
tree, to be crucified among thieves, and made to taste gall and
vinegar; and in thy deadly extremity, to endure such a sea of God's
wrath, that made thee to cry out, as if thou hadst been forsaken of God
thy Father; yea, to have thy innocent heart pierced with a cruel spear,
and thy precious blood to be spilt before thy blessed mother's eyes?
Sweet Saviour, how much wast thou tormented to endure all this, seeing
I am so much amazed to think upon it! I inquire for thy offence, but I
can find none in thee; no, nor so much as guile to have been found in
thy mouth. Thy enemies are challenged, and none of them dare rebuke
thee of sin; thy accusers, that are suborned, agree not in their
witness; the judge that condemns thee, openly cleareth thy innocency;
his wife sends him word she was warned in a dream that thou wast a just
man, and therefore should take heed of doing injustice unto thee. The
centurion that executed thee, confessed thee of a truth to be both a
just man, and the very Son of God.

The thief that hanged with thee justifieth thee, that thou hast done
nothing amiss. What is the cause, then, O Lord, of this thy cruel
ignominy, passion, and death? I, O Lord, I am the cause of these thy
sorrows; my sins wrought thy shame, my iniquities are the occasion of
thy injuries. I have committed the fault, and thou art plagued for the
offence; I am guilty, and thou art arraigned; I committed the sin, and
thou sufferedst the death; I have done the crime, and thou hangest on
the cross. Oh the deepness of God's love! Oh the wonderful disposition
of heavenly grace! O the unmeasurable measure of divine mercy! The
wicked transgresseth, and the just is punished; the guilty let escape,
and the innocent is arraigned; the malefactor is acquitted, and the
harmless condemned; what the evil man deserveth, the good man
suffereth; the servant doeth the fault, the master endures the strokes.
What shall I say? Man sinneth, and God dieth. O Son of God! who can
sufficiently express thy love, or commend thy pity, or ex-fot thy
praise? I was proud, and thou art humble; I was disobedient, and thou
becamest obedient; I did eat the forbidden fruit, and thou didst hang
on the cursed tree; I played the glutton, and thou didst fast; evil
concupiscence drew me to eat the pleasant apple, and perfect charity
led thee to drink of the bitter cup; I essayed the sweetness of the
fruit, and thou didst taste the bitterness of the gall. Foolish Eve
smiled when I laughed, but blessed Mary wept when thy heart bled and
died. O my God here I see thy goodness and my badness, thy justice and
my injustice, the impiety of my flesh, and the piety of thy nature. And
now, O blessed Lord, thow hast endured all this for my sake, what shall
I render unto thee for all thy benefits bestowed upon me a sinful soul?
Indeed, Lord, I acknowledge that I owe thee already, for my creation,
more than I am able to pay; for I am in that respect bound with all my
powers and affections to love and adore thee. If I owed myself unto
thee for giving me myself in my creation, what shall I now render thee
for giving thyself for me to so cruel a death, to procure my
redemption? Great was the benefit that thou wouldst create me of
nothing; but what tongue can express the greatness of this grace, that
thou didst redeem me with so dear a price, when I was worse than
nothing? Surely, Lord, if I cannot pay the thanks I owe thee (and who
can pay thee, who bestowest thy graces without respect of merit or
regard of measure?) it is the abundance of thy blessings that makes me
such a bankrupt, that I am so far unable to pay the principal, that I
cannot possibly pay so much as the interest of thy love.

But, O my Lord, thou knowest that since the loss of thy image, by the
fall of my unhappy parents, I cannot love thee with all my might and
mind, as I should; therefore as thou didst first cast thy love upon me
when. I was a child of wrath and a lump of the lost and condemned
world, so now, I beseech thee, shed abroad thy love by thy Spirit
through all my faculties and affections, that though I can never pay
thee in that measure of love which thou hast deserved, yet I may
endeavour to repay thee in such a manner as thou vouchsafest to accept
in mercy; that I may in truth of heart love my neighbour for thy sake,
and love thee above ail for thine own sake. Let nothing be pleasant
unto me, but that which is pleasing unto thee. And, sweet Saviour,
suffer me never to be lost or cast away, whom thou hast bought so
dearly with thine own most precious blood. O Lord, let me never forget
thine infinite love, and this unspeakable benefit of my redemption;
without which, it had been better for me never to have been, than to
have any being.

And seeing that thou hast vouchsafed me the assistance of thy Holy
Spirit, suffer me, O heavenly Father, Who art the Father of spirits, in
the mediation of thy Son, to speak a few words in the ears of my Lord:
if thou, O Father, despisest me for my iniquities, as I have deserved,
yet be merciful unto me for the merits of thy Son, who so much for me
hath suffered. What if thou seest nothing in me but misery, which might
move anger and passion; yet behold the merits of thy Son, and thou
shalt see enough to move thee to mercy and compassion; behold the
mystery of his incarnation, and remit the misery of my transgression.
And as oft as the Wounds of thy Son appear in thy sight, O let the
woes, of my sins be hid from thy presence; as oft as the redness of his
blood glitters in thy eyes, O let the guiltiness of my sins be blotted
out of thy book. The wantonness of my flesh provokes thee to wrath, O
let the purity of his flesh persuade thee to mercy; that as my flesh
seduced me to sin, so his flesh may reduce me into thy favour. My
disobedience hath deserved a great revenge, but his obedience merits a
greater weight of mercy; for what can man deserve to suffer, which God,
made man, cannot merit to have forgiven? When I consider the greatness
of thy passion, then do I see the trueness of that saying, That Christ
came into the world to save the chiefest sinners. Darest thou, O Cain,
say that thy sins are greater than may be forgiven? thou liest like a
murderer; the mercies of one Christ are able to forgive a world of
Cains, if they will believe and repent. "The sins of all sinners are
finite, the mercies of God are infinite. Therefore, O Father, for the
death and passion's sake which thy Son Jesus Christ has suffered for
me, and I have now remembered to thee, pardon and forgive thou unto me
all my sins, and deliver me from the curse and vengeance which they
have justly deserved, and through his merits, make me, O Lord, a
partaker of thy mercy. It is thy mercy that I so earnestly knock for;
neither shall my importunity cease to call and knock, with the man that
would borrow the loaves, until thou arise and open unto me thy gates of
grace; and if thou wilt not bestow on me thy loaves, yet, O Lord, deny
me not the crumbs of thy mercy, and those shall suffice thy hungry
handmaid. And seeing thou requirest nothing for thy benefits, but that
I love thee in the truth of my inward heart, whereof a new creature is
the truest outward testimony, and that it is as easy for thee to make
me a new creature, as to bid me to be such; create in me, O Christ, a
new heart, and renew in me a right spirit, and then thou shalt see how,
mortifying old Adam and his corrupt lusts, I will serve thee as thy new
creature, in a new life, after a new way, with a new tongue,, and new
manners, with new words, and new works, to the glory of thy name, and
the winning other sinful souls to thy faith, by my devout example. Keep
me for ever, O my Saviour, from the torments of hell, and tyranny of
the devil; and when I am to depart this life, send thy holy angels to
carry me, as they did the soul of Lazarus, into thy kingdom; receive me
into that joyful paradise, which thou didst promise to the penitent
thief, who at his last gasp upon the cross so devoutly begged thy
mercy, and admission into thy kingdom. Grant this, O Christ, for thy
own name's sake, to whom, as is most due, I ascribe all glory, and
honour, praise, and dominion, both now and for ever."

FINIS.
